What an inspiring story!!! ... until inevitably it had to be a natalist propaganda of course. Brace yourselves for seeing more of these high calibre propaganda pieces in the coming days. The slave-owners are scared. Slaves deciding to not leave their replacement is making it hard for the masters to dictate the terms of slavery contracts. What stories like this will leave out is that either the inspiring personality either wasn't born into an average income family, or in the rare case where they were, they had to be at the mercy of some good Samaritans. To make you a good slave they have to first condition you into feeling grateful. But before that they have to create the condition where you are at the mercy of others. And that condition cannot begin unless you are born. 

I know how unpopular this opinion will be. It's the prevailing notion that it's fine to gamble with your children's life. If they turn out to do great, then, hooray, you are a hero, model parent. But if life offers them no respite, no distractions from what it really is, which is vulnerability to suffering and necessities, you are not the villain, because you tried. People will come to console you. There is no punishment for your short-sightedness, your complete inability to take on the responsibility that you are conditioned to do, not being able to provide for your children's necessities, even though all their necessities are the direct consequences of your decision. There are no requirements for becoming a parent. No checklist. If your are physically capable of breeding, nobody will stop you. There's nothing wrong with the unequal power dynamic that has to exist between parents and children, the relationship which is the seed of all other slave-master relationships that rely on toxic gratefulness, that rely on the slave-owners creating the very conditions which the slaves are supposed to feel grateful towards their masters for alleviating. 

Long live natalism. Long live slavery.