
# hrs
http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/corpustei/transformations/plaintext/sa_bANa-harSacarita.txt

http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/corpustei/transformations/plaintext/sa_bANa-harSacaritapariziSTa.txt

https://www.wisdomlib.org/hinduism/book/the-harsha-charita
## c1
#### 42
bhrātarau pāraśavau candrasena-mātṛṣeṇau, bhāṣākavir īśānaḥ paraṃ mittram, praṇayinau rudra-nārāyaṇau, vidvāṃsau vārabāṇa-vāsabāṇau, varṇakavir veṇībhārataḥ prākṛta-kṛt-kula-putro vāyuvikāraḥ, bandināv anaṅgabāṇa-sūcībāṇau, katyāyanikā [42] cakravākikā, jāṅguliko mayūrakaḥ, tāmbūla-dāyakaś caṇḍakaḥ, bhiṣak-putro mandārakaḥ,pustaka-vācakaḥ sudṛṣṭiḥ, kalādaś cāmīkaraḥ, hairikaḥ sindhuṣeṇaḥ, lekhako govindakaḥ, citra-kṛd vīravarmā, pusta-kṛt kumāradattaḥ, mārdaṅgiko jīmūtaḥ, gāyanau somila-grahādityau, sairandhrī kuraṅgikā, vāṃśikau madhukara-pārāvatau, gāndharvôpādhyāyo dardurakaḥ, saṃvāhikā keralikā lāsaka-yuvā tāṇḍavikaḥ, ākṣika ākhaṇjalaḥ, kitavo bhīmakaḥ, śailāli-yuvā śikhaṇḍakaḥ, nartakī hariṇikā, pārāśarī sumatiḥ, kṣapaṇako vīradevaḥ, kathako jayasenaḥ, śaivo vakraghoṇaḥ, mantra-sādhakaḥ karālaḥ, a-sura-vivara-vyasanī lohitākṣaḥ, dhātu-vāda-vid vihaṅgamaḥ, dārduriko dāmodaraḥ, aindrajālikaś cakīrākṣaḥ, maskarī tāmracūḍakaḥ. 

He had friends and companions of his own years, and among them two brothers of low birth, Candrasena and Matrisena, a dear friend the vernacular poet Icana, adherents Rudra and Narayana, preceptors Varavana and Vasavana, a descriptive poet Venibharata, a Prakrit poet the young noble Vayuvikara, two panegyrists Anangavana and Sricivana, an ascetic widow, Cakravakika, a snake-doctor Mayuraka, a betel-bearer Candaka, a young physician Mandaraka, a reader Sudristi, a goldsmith Camikara, a supervisor Sindhusena, a scribe Govindaka, a painter Viravarman, a modeller Kumaradatta, a drummer Jimuta, two singers Somila and Grahaditya, a maid Kurangika, two pipers Madhukara and Paravata, a music-teacher Darduraka, a shampooer Keralika, a dancer Tandavika, a dicer Ākhandala, a gamester Bhimaka, a young actor Cikhandaka, a dancing girl Harinika, a Paracara mendicant Sumati, a Jain monk Viradeva, a story-teller Jayasena, a Saiva devotee Vakraghona, a magician Karala, a treasure-seeker Lohitaksa, an assayer Vihangama, a potter Damodara, a juggler Cakoraksa, a Brahman mendicant Tamracuda. 

sa ebhir anyaiś cânugamyamāno bālatayā nighnatām upagato deśântarâvalokana-kautukâkṣipta-hṛdayaḥ satsv api pitṛ-pitāmahôpātteṣu brāhmaṇa-janôciteṣu vibhaveṣu sati câ-vicchinne vidyā-prasaṅge gṛhān niragāt. agāc ca nir-avagraho grahavān iva nava-yauvanena svairiṇā manasā mahatām upahāsyatām.

With these and others for his companions, pliant from youthfulness, smit with a passion for seeing other lands, despite the wealth sufficient for a Brahman amassed by his father and grandfather, despite his hitherto uninterrupted pursuit of knowledge, he went forth from his home; and, being free from all restraint and seeming bewitched by early youth. through a headstrong will, he brought himself into the derision of the great.

atha śanaiḥ śanair aty-udāra-vyavahṛti-mano-hṛnti bṛhanti rāja-kulāni vīkṣamāṇaḥ, nir-avadya-vidyā-vidyotitāni guru-kulāni ca sevamānaḥ, mahârhâlāpa-gambhīra-guṇavad-goṣṭhīś côpatiṣṭhamānaḥ, sva-bhāva-gambhīra-dhī- [43] -r dhanāni vidagdha-maṇḍalāni ca gāhamānaḥ, punar api tam eva vaipaścitīm ātma-vaṃśôcitāṃ prakṛtim abhajat.

But gradually thereafter by observation of great courts charming the mind with their noble routine, by paying his respects to the schools of the wise brilliant with blameless knowledge, by attendance at the risen assemblies of able men deep in priceless discussions, by plunging into the circles of clever men dowered with profound natural wisdom, he regained the sage attitude of mind customary among his race. 

After long years he returned once more to his own native soil, resort of Brahmans, shelter of the Vatsyayana line. There, welcomed, like a feast-day, by kinsmen respectfully announcing their relationship and renewing after long absence their kindly affection, he found himself in the midst of the friends of his youth enjoying almost the bliss of liberation.
## c3
#### 103
punar-ukta-bāla-pragraha-veṣṭana-niś-cala-mūlena baddha-mṛt-pariśodhana-vaṃśa-tvak-titaunā kaupīna-sa-nātha-śikhareṇa kharjūra-puṭa-samudgaka-garbhī-kṛta-bhikṣā-kapālakena dārava-phalaka-traya-tri-koṇa-tri-yaṣṭi-niviṣṭa-kamaṇḍalunā bahir-upapādita- [102] -pādukâvasthānena sthūla-daśā-sūtra-niyantrita-pustikā-pūlakena vāma-kara-dhṛtena yoga-bhārakeṇâdhyāsita-skandham, itara-kara-gṛhīta-vetrâsanaṃ maskariṇam adrākṣīt. 

soon the king saw the ascetic enter, a tall fellow with arms extending to his knees, emaciated by a mendicant's life yet from the stoutness of the bones in his limbs appearing fat, broad in the head, his forehead undulating with deep wrinkles, fleshless hollows beneath his eyes, which were round and ruddy as wine drops, his nose slightly curved, one ear very pendulous, the rows of his prominent teeth distinct as seeds in a gourd, his lip loose as a horse's, his jaw elongated by a hanging chin. A red ascetic's scarf hanging from his shoulder formed his vaikaksaka wrap; his upper robe, consisting of a tattered rag knotted above his heart and stained with red chalk, seemed to betoken the knotted passions of his heart, which he had rent in pieces. In one hand he grasped his bamboo stool. His left held a yoke pole resting on his shoulder, where its motionless point of support was tied with a complicated fastening of hair rope; to this were attached his dirt-scraper and sieve of bamboo bark, his loin cloth at the end, his alms bowl contained in its receptacle, namely a cavity of Kharjura wood, his waterpot fixed in a triangular support made of three sticks, his slippers disposed outside, and a bundle of manuscript bound by a string of stout cord.

kṣiti-patir apy upagatam ucitena câinam ādareṇânvagrahīt. āsīnaṃ ca papraccha: "kva bhairavācāryaḥ?" iti. sâdara-nara-pati-vacana-mudita-matis tu parivrāṭ tam upanagaraṃ sarasvatī-taṭa-vanâvalambini śūnyâyatane sthitam ācacakṣe. bhūyaś câbabhāṣe: "arcayati hi mahā-bhāgaṃ bhagavān āśīr-vacasā" ity uktvā côpaninye yoga-bhārakād ākṛṣya bhairavācārya-prahitāni ratnavanti bahalâloka-liptântaḥ-purāṇi pañca rājatāni puṇḍarīkāṇi.

As he drew near, the king welcomed him with the usual courtesies, and when he was seated, asked where Bhairavacarya was. Charmed with the king's gracious speech, the mendicant stated that he was staying near the city in a deserted house contiguous with the woods on the Sarasvati's banks; and he further added 'His reverence honours your sovereign majesty with his blessing.' With which words he drew from his pack and presented five jewelled silver lotuses sent by Bbairavacarya, which overlaid the harem with a glow of light.

nara-patis tu priya-jana-praṇaya-bhaṅga-kātaro dākṣiṇyam anurudhyamāno grahaṇa-lāghavaṃ ca laṅghayitum a-samartho dolāyamānena manasā sthitvā ciraṃ kathaṃ-katham apy ati-saujanya-nighnas tāni jagrāha. jagāda ca: "sarva-phala-prasava-hetuḥ śiva-bhaktir iyaṃ no mano-ratha-dur-labhāni phalati phalāni. yenâivam asmāsu prīyate tatra-bhagavān bhuvana-gurur bhairavācāryaḥ. śvo draṣṭāsmi bhagavantam" ity uktvā ca maskariṇaṃ vyasarjayat. anayā ca vārtayā parāṃ mudam avāpa.

The king, shrinking, as politeness dictated, from slighting a friend's gift, but also unwilling to be guilty of too hasty acceptance, paused a moment wavering, but at length, yielding to his great nobleness, he took the gifts and said: - 'Our devotion to Shiva, the source of all fruitful results, produces fruits inaccessible indeed to desire, seeing that we find such favour with his reverence, the guru of the world. To-morrow I will see his reverence.' With these words he dismissed the ascetic, profoundly delighted at his news.

aparedyuś ca prātar evôtthāya vājinam adhiruhya samucchrita-śvetâtapatraḥ samuddhūyamāna-dhavala-cāmara-yugalaḥ katipayair eva rāja-putraiḥ parivṛto bhairavācāryaṃ savitāram iva śaśī draṣṭuṃ pratasthe. gatvā ca kiñ-cid antaraṃ tadīyam evâbhi-mukham āpatantam anyatamaṃ śiṣyam adrākṣrīt. aprākṣīc ca: "kva bhagavān āste?" iti. so 'kathayat: "asya jīrṇa-mātṛ-gṛhasyôtareṇa bilva-vāṭikām adhyāste" iti. gatvā ca taṃ pradeśam avatatāra turagāt. praviveśa ca bilva-vāṭikām.

The next day he rose early, mounted his horse, and with his white umbrella held above him, and a pair of white chowries waving, proceeded accompanied by only a few nobles to see Bhairavacarya, like the moon visiting the sun. Having advanced some distance, he saw one of Bhairavacarya's own disciples approaching, and inquired where his reverence was staying. 'In a Bel-tree plantation,' the man replied, 'north of yon old temple to the Mothers.' So he proceeded to the place, dismounted, and entered the plantation.

atha mahataḥ kārpaṭhika-vṛndasya madhye prātar eva snātam, dattâṣṭa- [103] -puṣpikam,

In the midst of a great throng of recluses he beheld Bhairavacarya, who on seeing him at a distance moved like the ocean seeing the moon, and, after his disciples had first risen, rose and went forward to meet the king. 
#### 108
so 'yaṃ bhavad-bhuja-yogyo gṛhyatām" ity abhidhāyâpahṛta-karpaṭâvacchādanāt parivārād ācakarṣa śarad-gagana-talam iva piṇḍatāṃ nītam, kālindī-pravāham iva stambhita-jalam, nandaka-jigīṣayā kṛṣṇa-kopitaṃ kāliyam iva kṛpāṇatāṃ gatam, loka-vināśāya prakāśita-dhārā-sāraṃ pralaya-kāla-megha-khaṇḍam iva nabhas-talāt patitam, dṛśyamāna-vikaṭa-danta-maṇḍalaṃ hāsam iva hiṃsāyāḥ, hari-bāhu-daṇḍam iva kṛta-dṛḍha-muṣṭi-graham, sakala-bhuvana-jīvitâpaharaṇa-kṣameṇa kāla-kūṭenêva nirmitam, kṛtânta-kopânala-taptenêvâyasā ghaṭitam, ati-tīkṣṇatayā pavana-sparśenâpi ruṣêva kvaṇantam maṇi-sabhā-kuṭṭima-patat-pratibimba-cchadmanâtmānam api dvidhêva pāṭayantam, ari-śiraś-cheda-lagnaiḥ kacair iva kiraṇaiḥ karālita-dhāram, muhur-muhus taḍid-unmeṣa-taralaiḥ prabhā-cakra-cchuritair jarjaritâtapam, khaṇḍaśaś chindantam iva divasam, kaṭâkṣam iva kāla-rātreḥ, karṇôtpalam iva kālasya, oṃ-kāram iva krauryasya alaṃ-kāram ahaṃ-kārasya, kula-mitraṃ kopasya, dehaṃ darpasya, [108] su-sahāyaṃ sāhasasya, apatyaṃ mṛtyoḥ, āgamana-mārgaṃ lakṣmyāḥ, nirgamana-mārgaṃ kīrteḥ, kṛpāṇam.

Pray accept of this, a weapon befitting your majesty's arm.' With these words he removed the covering of rags, and drew forth from the sheath a sword, like the autumn sky converted to a scimitar, Kalindi's stream solidified to rival Vishnu's sword, the Kaliya snake in its anger against Krishna become a weapon, a bit of the black cloud of doomsday fallen from the heaven foreshadowing a rainfall to dissolve the world; resembling the smile of Hate-, displaying a circle of great teeth, or Hari's stout arm with the fist' tightly clenched; formed as it were of deadly poison capable of taking the lives of all the world; composed of steel heated by the fiery wrath of fate; in its exceeding sharpness humming as with rage at the mere touch of the air; seeming, as its image fell upon the jewelled pavement of the hall, to cleave its very self in twain: jagged in edge with rays, like hairs left upon it after decapitating foes; mincing the day, whose light was cut in pieces by an inlay of radiance flickering like the lightning's frequent flash; a side-glance, as it were, of the night of doom, death's ear-lotus, the triumphal shout of pitilessness, the ornament of arrogance, the family friend of wrath, the body of pride, the comrade of valour, the child of death, the path of approaching glory, the road of departing fame.

avani-patis tu taṃ gṛhītvā kareṇâyudha-prītyā pratimā-nibhenâliṅgann iva su-ciraṃ dadarśa. saṃdideśa ca: "vaktavyo bhagavān para-dravya-grahaṇâvajñā-dur-vidagdham api hi me mano yuṣmad-viṣaye na śaknoti vacana-vyatikrama-vyabhicāram ācaritum" iti. parivrāṭ tu gṛhīte tasmin parituṣṭaḥ "svasti bhavate. sādhayāmaḥ" ity uktvā nirayāsīt. nṛpaś ca prakṛtyā vīra-rasânurāgī tena kṛpāṇenâmanyata kara-tala-vartinīṃ medinīm.

The king took it in his hand, and gazing at it for a while, seemed, as it reflected his image, to be giving the weapon a loving embrace. At length he gave his message: - 'Inform his reverence that, though too practised in the art of scorning the acceptance of other people's property, my mind is unable in his case to commit the impropriety of going counter to his words.' Pleased at the acceptance, the mendicant answered, 'Fortune attend your majesty: I now take leave of you,' and so departed. The king, naturally of a warlike humour, felt that by aid of that sword the earth lay in the hollow of his hand.

atha vrajatsu divaseṣv ekadā bhairavācāryo rājānam upahvare sôpagraham avādīt: "tāta! svârthâlasāḥ parôpakāra-dakṣāś ca prakṛtayo bhavanti bhavyānām. bhavâdṛśāṃ cârthi-darśanaṃ mahôtsavaḥ praṇayanam ārādhanam artha-grahaṇam upakāraḥ. bhūmir asi sarva-loka-mano-rathānām. yenābhidhīyase. śrūyatām. bhagavato mahā-kāla-hṛdaya-nāmno mahā-mantrasya kṛṣṇa-srag-ambarânulepanenâkalpena kalpa-kathitena mahā-śmaśāne japa-koṭyā kṛta-pūrva-sevo 'smi. tasya ca vetāla-sādhanâvasānā siddhiḥ. a-sahāyaiś ca sā dur-avāpā. tvaṃ câlam asmai karmaṇe. 

The days passing, Bhairavacarya on one occasion made a secret petition to the king: - 'The dispositions of the great, your majesty, are careless of their own interests, versed in serving others. To such as your majesty seeing petitioners is a festival, solicitation is to confer a favour,. the acceptance of gifts by others a boon. You are the centre of all men's wishes. Wherefore I now address you: - Listen; by a crore of muttered prayers have I, in garlands, clothes, and unguents all of black as enjoined in the Kalpa, performed in the great cemetery the exordium of the potent rite called Mahakilahridaya. Its completion ends with the laying of a goblin. Without companions this is unattainable. You are capable of achieving this. 

tvayi ca gṛhīta-bhare bhaviṣyanty a-pare sahāyās trayaḥ ekaḥ sa evâsmākaṃ ṭīṭibha-nāmā bāla-mitraṃ maskarī yo bhavantam upatiṣṭhate. 

Should you undertake the task, there will be three other assistants: one the friend of my boyhood, Titibha, the mendicant who visits your majesty; 

dvitīyaḥ sa pātālasvāmī. a-paro mac-chiṣya eva karṇatāla-nāmā drāviḍaḥ. yadi sādhu manyase tato nīyatām ayaṃ diṅ-nāga-hasta-dīrgho gṛhītâṭṭahāso niśām ekām eka-diṅ-mukhârgalatāṃ bāhuḥ." 

the second Patalasvamin; the third a Dravidian disciple of mine, Karnatala by name. If you approve, let this arm of yours, long as a sky elephant's trunk, take Attahasa and for one night become the bolt of one quarter of the heavens.'

iti kṛta-vacasi ca tasminn andhakāra-praviṣṭa iva dṛṣṭa-prakāśaḥ prāptôpakārâvakāśaḥ pramuditenântar-ātmanā narêndraḥ samabhāṣata: "bhagavan! param anugṛhīto 'smy anena śiṣya-jana-sāmānyena nideśena kṛta-parigraham ivâtmānam evâimi" iti. nananda ca tena [109] narêndra-vyāhṛtena bhairavācāryaḥ. cakāra ca saṃketam:

To this speech the king, delighted, like one in darkness who sees a light, at the opportunity of conferring a favour, replied: - 'I am highly honoured, your reverence; I consider myself favoured by a charge to be shared with your disciples.' Overjoyed at the king's words, Bhairavacarya proceeded to make an appointment; - ' 
## c5
#### 173
tasyāṃ snātvā pitre dadāv udakam. apasnātaś câ-niṣpīḍita-maulir eva paridhāyôdgamanīya-dukūla-vāsasī niḥśvāsa-paro nir-ātapatro nir-utsāraṇaḥ samupanīte 'pi saptau caraṇābhyām eva nāsâgrâsaktena rakta-tāmarasa-tāmreṇa cakṣuṣā hṛdayâvaśeṣasyâpi pitur dāha-śaṅkayā śokâgnim iva udgirann a-tāmbūlasyâpi sucira-prakṣālitasya kalpa-taru-kisalaya-komalasyêva sva-bhāva-pāṭalasyâdharasyâdhara-pallavasya prabhayā māṃsa-rudhira-kavalān iva hṛdayâbhighātād udvamann uṣṇa-niḥśvāsa-mokṣair bhavanam ājagāma.

Thus the prince passed on to the Sarasvati's bank, and having bathed in the river, offered water to his father. After the funeral bath, he stayed not to wring his hair, but having put on a pair of white silk robes, proceeded home full of sighs, umbrella-less, with none to clear his path, and, though a horse was led up, on foot: while his eyes, flushed like a red lotus and rivetted to the end of his nose, seemed vomiting forth his sorrow's flame for fear of burning his father, who now survived only in his heart, and his lower lip, though unstained by betel and now for a long time washedclean, yet, being naturally red as a spray of the tree of Paradise, appeared by its colour, as the hot sighs came forth, to emit lumps of flesh and blood from a cloven heart.

rāja-vallabhās tu bhṛtyāḥ suhṛdaḥ sacivāś ca tasminn evâhani nirgatya priyaṃ putra-dāram utsṛjyôdbāṣpair bandhubhir vāryamāṇā api bahu-nṛpa-guṇa-gaṇa-hṛta-hṛdayāḥ ke-cid ātmānaṃ bhṛguṣu babandhuḥ, ke-cit tatrâiva tīrtheṣu tasthuḥ, ke-cid anaśanair āstīrṇa-tṛṇa-kuśā vyathamāna-mānasāḥ śucam asamām aśamayan, ke-cic chalabhā iva vaiśvānaraṃ śokâvega-vivaśā viviśuḥ, ke-cid dāruṇa-duḥkha-dahana-dahyamāna-hṛdayā gṛhīta-vācas tuṣāra-śikhariṇaṃ śaraṇam upāyayuḥ, ke-cid vindhyôpatyakāsu vana-kari-kula-kara-śīkarâsāra-sicyamāna-tanavaḥ pallava-śayana-śāyinaḥ saṃtāpam aśamayan, ke-cit saṃnihitān api viṣayān utsṛjya sevā-vimukhāḥ paricchinnaiḥ piṇḍakair aṭavī-bhuvaḥ śūnyā jagṛhuḥ, ke-cit pavanâśanā dharma-dhanā dhamad-dhamanayo munayo babhūvuḥ, [173] ke-cid gṛhīta-kāṣāyāḥ kāpilaṃ matam adhijagire giriṣu, ke-cid ācoṭita-cūḍā-maṇiṣu śiraḥsu śaraṇī-kṛta-dhūrjaṭayo jaṭā jaghaṭire. apare pari-pāṭala-pralamba-cīvarâmbara-saṃvītāḥ svāmy-anurāgam ujjvalaṃ cakruḥ. anye tapo-vana-hariṇa-jihvâñcalôllihyamāna-mūrtayo jarāṃ yayuḥ. a-pare punaḥ pāṇi-pallava-pramṛṣṭair ātāmra-rāgair nayana-puṭaiḥ kamaṇḍalubhiś ca vāri vahanto gṛhīta-vratā muṇḍā viceruḥ.

On the same day the king's favourite servants, friends, and ministers, whose hearts were held tight by the bonds of his many virtues, went forth, and in spite of the remonstrances of tearful friends, abandoned their loved wives and children. Some consigned themselves to precipices: some stationed themselves at holy fords in the neighbourbood. Some in agony of heart spread couches of grass, and quieted their great sorrow by abstinence from food: some, beside themselves with passionate grief, plunged like moths into the flame. Some, in whose hearts burnt a fire of fierce pain, took vows of silence and sought refuge on the mount of snows: some to cool their heat lay on couches of twigs along the Vindhya slopes, where wild elephants bedewed their bodies with a shower bath from their trunks. Some, indisposed for a courtier's life, abandoned the gratifications within their reach, and lived on a limited diet in vacant forest openings: some by feeding on air became emaciated hermits, rich only in virtue.Some assumed red robes and studied the system of Kapila in the mountains: some, tearing off their crest jewels, bound the ascetic's knot upon their heads, and made Shiva their refuge: others [193] by enveloping themselves in trailing pale-red rags displayed the bright afterglow of their love. Others again reached old age in sylvan hermitages, where the deer licked their forms with the ends of their tongues: others finally took vows, and roamed as shaven monks, bearing water in pots and in the hollows of their eyes, both equally red in colour and rubbed by their hands.

devam api harṣaṃ tad-avasthaṃ pitṛ-śoka-vihvalī-kṛtam, śriyaṃ śāpa iti, mahīṃ mahā-pātakam iti, rājyaṃ roga iti, bhogān bhuj-aṅgā iti, nilayaṃ niraya iti, bandhuṃ bandhanam iti, jīvitam a-yaśa iti, dehaṃ droha iti, kalyatāṃ kalaṅka iti, āyur a-puṇya-phalam iti, āhāraṃ viṣam iti, viṣam a-mṛtam iti, candanaṃ dahana iti, kāmaṃ krakaca iti, hṛdaya-sphoṭanam abhyudaya iti ca manyamānam, sarvāsu kriyāsu vimukham, pitṛ-pitāmaha-parigrahâgatāś ciraṃ-tanāḥ kula-putrāḥ, vaṃśa-kramâhita-gauravāś ca grāhya-giro guravaḥ, śruti-smṛtîtihāsa-viśāradāś ca jarad-dvi-jātayaḥ, śrutâbhijana-śīla-śālino mūrdhâbhiṣiktāś câmātyā rājāno, yathāvad-adhigatâtma-tattvāś ca saṃstutā maskariṇaḥ, sama-duḥkha-sukhāś ca munayaḥ, saṃsārâsāratva-kathana-kuśalā brahma-vādinaḥ, śokâpanayana-nipuṇāś ca paurāṇikāḥ paryavārayan.

My lord Harsha's condition underwent no change. Wild with grief for his father, he turned away from all the avocations of life, regarding glory as a curse, the earth a mortal sin, royalty a disease, pleasures serpents, home a hell, family ties a bondage, life an infamy, the body an infliction, health a blot, vigour a result of sin, food a poison, poison ambrosia, sandal a flame, love a saw, heartbreak a felicity. He was closely attended by young nobles of ancient houses, which had enjoyed the favour of the court for generations, venerable trusted advisers wearing an inherited dignity, old Brahmans versed in Shruti, Smriti and Itihasa, anointed counsellors of royal rank endowed with learning, birth and character, approved ascetics well trained in the doctrine of the Self, sages indifferent to pain and pleasure, Vedantists skilled in expounding the nothingness of the fleeting world, mythologists expert in allaying sorrow. 

a-svatantrī-kṛtaś ca tair manasâpi nâlabhata śokânupravaṇam ācaritum. pracura-mitrânunīyamānaś ca sanābhibhiḥ kathaṃ katham apy āhārâdikāsu kriyāsv ābhimukhyam abhajata. bhrātṛ-gata-hṛdayaś câcintayat: "api nāma tātasya maraṇaṃ mahā-pralaya-sadṛśam idam upaśrutya āryo bāṣpa-jala-snāto na gṛhṇīyād valkale. nâśrayed vā rāja-rṣir āśrama-padam. na viśed vā puruṣa-siṃho giri-guhām. aśru-salila-nirbhara-bharita-nayana-nalina-yugalo vā paśyed a-nāthāṃ pṛthivīm. prathama-vyasana-viṣama-vihvalaḥ smared ātmānaṃ vā puruṣôttamaḥ. a-nityatayā janita-vairāgyo vā na [174] nirākuryād upasarpantīṃ rājya-lakṣmīm. 

Under their influence the prince was never allowed even in thought to follow the dictates of grief, and through their solicitations he gradually lost his distaste for food and the other dues of life. His thoughts recurring to his brother, thus he mused:--"Pray heaven my brother, when he learns of our father's death, a type of the world's dissolution, may not after a bath of tears assume two robes of bark! or seek [194] a hermitage as a royal sage! or, man-lion as he is, enter a mountain cave! Though his lotus eyes brim with a flood of tears, may he yet look upon the lordless earth! Tormented by the poisonous pangs of a first loss, may the best of men yet remember himself! Never may indifference due to the transitoriness of things lead him to slight the advances of sovereign glory! 

All aflame with the fire of direful pain, may he have recourse to the coronation bath! Once arrived here may he not, when pressed by the kings, display a contrary mind! True, my noble brother was deeply devoted to his sire. He was for ever singing to me, our father's praises, 'Think you, Harsha, that any man ever did or will possess such a stately frame, tall as a golden palm, such a great lotus of a face with its upturned looks abloom all day with love for the sun's rays, such stave-like arms, bright as diamond pillars, such smiles mocking the grace of the lazy sot Haladhara? What other is high-minded, valiant, and generous?' " Amid these and other thoughts he could scarce pass the time, waiting with longing heart for his brother's advent.
## c8
#### 236
cīvarâmbara-rāga-kaṣāyôdaka-dūṣitôddeśāḥ, meghamayā iva kṛta-śikhaṇḍi-kula-kolāhalāḥ, vedamayā ivâ-parimita-śākhā-bheda-gahanāḥ, māṇikyamayā iva mahānīla-tanavaḥ, timiramayā iva sakala-jana- [236] -nayana-muṣaḥ, yāmunā ivôrdhvī-kṛta-mahā-hradāḥ, marakata-maṇi-śyāmalāḥ krīḍā-parvatakā iva vasantasya, añjanâ-calā iva pallavitāḥ, tanayā ivâṭavī-jātā vindhyasyâdreḥ, pātālândha-kāra-rāśaya iva bhittvā bhuvam utthitāḥ, pratipraveśikā iva varṣā-vāsarāṇām, aṃśâvatārā iva kṛṣṇârdha-rātrīṇām, indra-nīlamayāḥ prāsādā iva vana-devatānām, purastād darśana-patham avaterus taravaḥ.

the peacocks raised their storm of cries as if the thickets were so many clouds; the branches of innumerable trees met in confusion like the shakhas of the Veda; the trees assumed dark forms as if made of rubies, they obscured all eyes as if made of darkness, they seemed to lift great dark lakes of verdure into the air like so many Yamunas, they were like pleasure-hills of the spring, dark-hued as with emeralds, or like flowering mountains of collyrium--they seemed children of the Vindhya born in the forest, or masses of hell's darkness which had burst up from the earth or close neighbours of the days of the rainy season or partial avatars of the nights of the dark fortnight, or palaces of the wood-nymphs constructed of sapphires.

tato nara-pater abhavan manasy a-dūra-vartinā khalu bhavitavyaṃ bhadantenêti. avatīrya ca giri-sariti samupaspṛśya yugapad-viśrāma-samaya-samunmukta-heṣā-ghoṣa-badhirī-kṛtâṭavī-gahanām asminn eva pradeśe sthāpayitvā vāji-senām avalambya ca tapasvi-jana-darśanôcitaṃ vinayaṃ hṛdayena dakṣiṇena ca hastena mādhavaguptam aṃse viralair eva rājabhir anugamyamānaś caraṇābhyām eva prāvartata gantum.

The king reflected, "The venerable mendicant cannot be far off." [265] Having alighted, and washed his mouth in a mountain stream and having made his troop of cavalry halt in that place while the forest glades were deafened by the neighing of the horses as they welcomed the sudden rest, and in his heart having assumed a deportment suitable for a visit to such a holy man, and leaning with his right hand on Madhavagupta's shoulder, he proceeded on foot attended by a few tributary kings.

who can tell the fate of his crop when we are gone?' 'Keep away your oxen, fellow! this field is guarded by watchmen.' 'The wagon is stuck fast: harness a strong pulling steer to the yoke.' 'Madman, you are crushing women: are your eyes burst?' 'You confounded elephant driver, you are playing with my elephant's trunk.' 'Trample him, you savage brute.' 'Brother, you are tripping in the mire.' 'O friend of the distressed, raise this ox from the mud.' 'This way, boy! in the thick of the dense elephant squad there is no getting out.'

atha teṣāṃ tarūṇāṃ madhye nānā-deśīyaiḥ sthāna-sthāneṣu sthāṇūn āśritaiḥ śilā-taleṣûpaviṣṭair latā-bhavanāny adhyāvasadbhir araṇyānī-nikuñjeṣu nilīnair viṭapa-cchāyāsu niṣaṇṇais taru-mūlāni niṣevamāṇair vīta-rāgair ārhatair maskaribhiḥ śveta-paṭaiḥ pāṇḍura-bhikṣubhir bhāgavatair varṇibiḥ keśa-luñcakaiḥ kāpilair jainair lokāyatikaiḥ kāṇādair aupaniṣadair aiśvarakāraṇikaiḥ kārandhamibhir dharma-śāstribhiḥ paurāṇikaiḥ sāptatantavaiḥ śaivaiḥ [237] śābdikaiḥ pāñcarātrikair anyaiś ca svān svān siddhântāñ śṛṇvadbhir abhiyuktaiś cintayadbhiś ca pratyuccaradbhiś ca saṃśayānaiś ca niścinvadbhiś ca vyutpādayadbhiś ca vivadamānaiś câbhyasyadbhiś ca vyācakṣāṇaiś ca śiṣyatāṃ pratipannair dūrād evâvedyamānam,

Then in the middle of the trees, while he was yet at a distance, the holy man's presence was suddenly announced by the king's seeing various Buddhists from various provinces seated in different situations,--perched on pillars, or seated on the rocks or dwelling in bowers of creepers or lying in thickets or in the shadow of the branches or squatting on the roots of trees,--devotees dead to all passion, Jainas in white robes, white mendicants, followers of Krishna, religious students, ascetics who pulled out their hair, followers of Kapila, Jainas, Lokayatikas, followers of Kanada, followers of the Upanishads, believers in God as a Creator, assayers of metals, students of the legal institutes, students of the Puranas, adepts in sacrifices requiring seven ministering priests, adepts in grammar, followers of the Pancaratra and others besides, all diligently following their own tenets, pondering, urging objections, raising doubts, resolving them, giving etymologies, disputing, studying, and explaining, and all gathered here as his disciples. 

ati-vinītaiḥ kapibhir api caitya-karma kurvāṇais tri-saraṇa-paraiḥ paramôpāsakaiḥ śukair api śākya-śāsana-kuśalaiḥ kośaṃ samupadiśadbhiḥ śikṣā-padôpadeśa-doṣôpaśama-śālinībhiḥ śārikābhir api dharma-deśanāṃ darśayantībhir an-avarata-śravaṇa-gṛhītâlikaiḥ kauśikair api bodhi-sattva-jātakāni japadbhir jāta-saugata-śīla-śītala-sva-bhāvaiḥ śārdūlair apy a-māṃsâśibhir upāsyamānam, āsanôpāntôpaviṣṭa-visrabdhân-eka-kesari-śāvakatayā muni-paramêśvaram, a-kṛtrima iva siṃhâsane niṣaṇṇam, 

Even some monkeys who had fled to the 'three Refuges' were gravely busy performing the ritual of the caitya, while some devout parrots, skilled in the Shakya shastras, were explaining the Kosha, [266] and some mainas, who had obtained calm by expositions of the duties of the monastery life, were giving lectures on the law, and some owls, who had gained insight by listening to the ceaseless round of instruction, were muttering the various births of the Bodhisattva, and even some tigers waited in attendance who had given up eating flesh under the calming influence of Buddhist teaching, while the fact that some young lions sat undisturbed near his seat shewed at once what a great sage he was, as he thus sat as it were on a natural lion-throne. 
# kdmb
https://sa.m.wikisource.org/wiki/%E0%A4%95%E0%A4%BE%E0%A4%A6%E0%A4%AE%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%AC%E0%A4%B0%E0%A5%80_%E0%A4%AA%E0%A5%82%E0%A4%B0%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%B5%E0%A4%AD%E0%A4%BE%E0%A4%97%E0%A4%83

https://sa.m.wikisource.org/wiki/%E0%A4%85%E0%A4%A8%E0%A5%81%E0%A4%95%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%B0%E0%A4%AE%E0%A4%A3%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%95%E0%A4%BE:%E0%A4%95%E0%A4%BE%E0%A4%A6%E0%A4%AE%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%AC%E0%A4%B0%E0%A5%80-%E0%A4%89%E0%A4%A4%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%A4%E0%A4%B0%E0%A4%AD%E0%A4%BE%E0%A4%97%E0%A4%83(%E0%A4%AA%E0%A4%BF.%E0%A4%B5%E0%A4%BF._%E0%A4%95%E0%A4%BE%E0%A4%A3%E0%A5%87)%E0%A5%A7%E0%A5%AF%E0%A5%A7%E0%A5%A9.djvu

http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/corpustei/transformations/plaintext/sa_bANa-kAdambarI-1.txt

http://gretil.sub.uni-goettingen.de/gretil/corpustei/transformations/plaintext/sa_abhinanda-kAdambarIkathAsAra.txt

https://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/41128/pg41128-images.html
## c10
(10) the Moon in his face, the Wind in his might, Bṛihaspati in his knowledge, Love in his beauty, the Sun in his glory, he resembled holy Nārāyaṇa, whose nature manifests every form, and who is the very essence of deity. Royal glory came to him once for all, like a woman coming to meet her lover, on the nights of battle stormy with the showers of ichor from the elephants’ temples, and stood by him in the midst of the darkness of thousands of coats of mail, loosened from the doors of the breasts of warriors. She seemed to be drawn irresistibly by his sword, which was uneven in its edge, by reason of the drops of water forced out by the pressure of his strong hand, and which [5]was decked with large pearls clinging to it when he clove the frontal bones of wild elephants. The flame of his majesty burnt day and night, as if it were a fire within his foes’ fair wives, albeit reft of their lords, as if he would destroy the husbands now only enshrined in their hearts.

## c15
(15) When the thousand-rayed sun, bursting open the young lotus-buds, had not long risen, though it had lost somewhat of the pinkness of dawn, a portress approached the king in his hall of audience, and humbly addressed him. Her form was lovely, yet awe-inspiring, and with the scimitar (a weapon rarely worn by women) hanging at her left side, was like a sandal-tree girt by a snake. Her bosom glistened with rich sandal ointment like the heavenly Ganges when the frontal-bone of Airāvata rises from its waters. 
## c16
(16) The chiefs bent before her seemed, by her reflection on their crests, to bear her on their foreheads as a royal command in human form. Like autumn,24 she was robed in the whiteness of haṃsas; like the blade [6]of Paraçurāma she held the circle of kings in submission; like the forest land of the Vindhyas, she bore her wand,25 and she seemed the very guardian-goddess of the realm. Placing on the ground her lotus hand and knee, she thus spake: ‘Sire, there stands at the gate a Caṇḍāla maiden from the South, a royal glory of the race of that Triçaṃku26 who climbed the sky, but fell from it at the murmur of wrathful Indra. She bears a parrot in a cage, and bids me thus hail your majesty: “Sire, thou, like the ocean, art alone worthy to receive the treasures of the whole earth. In the thought that this bird is a marvel, and the treasure of the whole earth, I bring it to lay at thy feet, and desire to behold thee.” 
# rama