https://www.thelatinlibrary.com/tertullian.html

https://www.tertullian.org/latin/latin.htm

https://www.earlychristianwritings.com/tertullian.html

https://en.m.wikisource.org/wiki/Author:Tertullian

# marcion
## b1
https://www.tertullian.org/articles/evans_marc/evans_marc_04book1.htm

https://www.earlychristianwritings.com/text/tertullian121.html

Galatians
## b2
https://www.tertullian.org/articles/evans_marc/evans_marc_05book2.htm

https://www.earlychristianwritings.com/text/tertullian122.html
### c13
[1] At enim ut malum postea erupit atque inde iam coepit bonitas dei cum adversario agere, aliud quoque negotium eadem illa iustitia dei nacta est iam secundum adversionem dirigendae bonitatis, ut seposita libertate eius, qua et ultro deus bonus, pro meritis cuiusque pensetur, dignis offeratur, indignis denegetur, ingratis auferatur, proinde omnibus aemulis vindicetur. [2] Ita omne hoc iustitiae opus procuratio bonitatis est; quod iudicando damnat, quod damnando punit, quod, ut dicitis, saevit, utique bono, non malo proficit. Denique timor iudicii ad bonum, non ad malum confert. Non enim sufficiebat bonum per semetipsum commendari, iam sub adversario laborans. Nam et si commendabile per semetipsum, non tamen et conservabile, quia expugnabile iam per adversarium, nisi vis aliqua praeesset timendi, quae bonum etiam nolentes appetere et custodire compelleret. [3] Ceterum tot illecebris mali expugnantibus bonum quis illud appeteret quod impune contemneret? Quis custodiret quod sine periculo amitteret? Legis mali viam latam et multo frequentiorem: nonne omnes illa laberentur, si nihil in illa timeretur? Horremus terribiles minas creatoris, et vix a malo avellimur. Quid, si nihil minaretur? Hanc iustitiam malum dices, quae malo non favet? Hanc bonum negabis, quae bono prospicit? Qualem oportet deum velles? qualem malles expediret? Sub quo delicta gauderent, cui diabolus illuderet? [4] Illum bonum iudicares deum qui hominem posset magis malum facere securitate delicti? Quis boni auctor, nisi qui et exactor? Proinde quis mali extraneus, nisi qui et inimicus? Quis inimicus, nisi qui et expugnator? Quis expugnator, nisi qui et punitor? Sic totus deus bonus est, dum pro bono omnia est. Sic denique omnipotens, quia et iuvandi et laedendi potens. Minus est tanturmnodo prodesse, quia non aliud quid possit quam prodesse. De eiusmodi qua fiducia bonum sperem, si hoc solum potest? quomodo innocentiae mercedem secter, si non et nocentiae spectem? [5] Diffidam necesse est, ne nec alteram partem remuneretur qui utramque non valuit. Usque adeo iustitia etiam plenitudo est divinitatis ipsius, exhibens deum perfectum et patrem et dominum, patrem clementia, dominum disciplina, patrem potestate blanda, dominum severa, patrem diligendum pie, dominum timendum necessarie, diligendum quia malit misericordiam quam sacrificium, et timendum quia nolit peccatum, diligendum quia malit paenitentiam peccatoris quam mortem, et timendum quia nolit peccatores sui iam non paenitentes. Ideo lex utrumque definit: Diliges deum, et, Timebis deum. Aliud obsecutori proposuit, aliud exorbitatori.
But yet, when evil afterwards broke out, and the goodness of God began now to have an adversary to contend against, God's justice also acquired another function, even that of directing His goodness according to men's application for it. And this is the result: the divine goodness, being interrupted in that free course whereby God was spontaneously good, is now dispensed according to the deserts of every man; it is offered to the worthy, denied to the unworthy, taken away from the unthankful, and also avenged on all its enemies. Thus the entire office of justice in this respect becomes an agency for goodness: whatever it condemns by its judgment, whatever it chastises by its condemnation, whatever (to use your phrase) it ruthlessly pursues, it, in fact, benefits with good instead of injuring. Indeed, the fear of judgment contributes to good, not to evil. For good, now contending with an enemy, was not strong enough to recommend itself by itself alone. At all events, if it could do so much, it could not keep its ground; for it had lost its impregnability through the foe, unless some power of fear supervened, such as might compel the very unwilling to seek after good, and take care of it. But who, when so many incentives to evil were assailing him, would desire that good, which he could despise with impunity? Who, again, would take care of what he could lose without danger? You read bow broad is the road to evil, how thronged in comparison with the opposite: would not all glide down that road were there nothing in it to fear? We dread the Creator's tremendous threats, and yet scarcely turn away from 308 evil. What, if He threatened not? Will you call this justice an evil, when it is all unfavourable to evil? Will you deny it to be a good, when it has its eye towards good? What sort of being ought you to wish God to be? Would it be right to prefer that He should be such, that sins might flourish under Him, and the devil make mock at Him? Would you suppose Him to be a good God, who should be able to make a man worse by security in sin? Who is the author of good, but He who also requires it? In like manner who is a stranger to evil, except Him who is its enemy? Who its enemy, besides Him who is its conqueror? Who else its conqueror, than He who is its punisher? Thus God is wholly good, because in all things He is on the side of good. In fact, He is omnipotent, because able both to help and to hurt. Merely to profit is a comparatively small matter, because it can do nothing else than a good turn. From such a conduct with what confidence can I hope for good, if this is its only ability? How can I follow after the reward of innocence, if I have no regard to the requital of wrong-doing? I must needs have my doubts whether he might not fail in recompensing one or other alternative, who was unequal in his resources to meet both. Thus far, then, justice is the very fulness of the Deity Himself, manifesting God as both a perfect father and a perfect master: a father in His mercy, a master in His discipline; a father in the mildness of His power, a master in its severity; a father who must be loved with dutiful affection, a master who must needs be feared; be loved, because He prefers mercy to sacrifice; be feared because He dislikes sin; be loved, because He prefers the sinner,s repentance to his death; be feared, because He dislikes the sinners who do not repent. Accordingly, the divine law enjoins duties in respect of both these attributes: Thou shalt love God, and, Thou shalt fear God. It proposed one for the obedient man, the other for the transgressor.
### c16
[1] Bona igitur et severitas quia iusta, si bonus iudex, id est iustus. Item cetera bona per quae opus bonum currit bonae severitatis, sive ira sive aemulatio sive saevitia. Debita enim omnia haec sunt severitati, sicut severitas debitum est iustitiae. Vindicanda erat procacitas aetatis verecundiam debentis. Atque ita non poterunt iudici exprobrari quae iudici accedunt, carentia et ipsa culpa, sicut et iudex. Quid enim, si medicum quidem dicas esse debere, ferramenta vero eius accuses quod secent et inurant et amputent et constrictent, quando sine instrumento artis medicus esse non possit? [2] Sed accusa male secantem, importune amputantem, temere inurentem, atque ita ferramenta quoque eius ut mala ministeria reprehende. Proinde est enim cum deum quidem iudicem admittis, eos vero motus et sensus per quos iudicat destruis. Deum nos a prophetis et a Christo, non a philosophis nec ab Epicuro erudimur. [3] Qui credimus deum etiam in terris egisse et humani habitus humilitatem suscepisse ex causa humanae salutis, longe sumus a sententia eorum qui nolunt deum curare quicquam. Inde venit ad haereticos quoque definitio eiusmodi, si deus irascitur et aemulatur et extollitur et exacerbatur, ergo et corrumpetur, ergo et morietur. Bene autem quod Christianorum est etiam mortuum deum credere et tamen viventem in aevo aevorum. [4] Stultissimi, qui de humanis divina praeiudicant, ut quoniam in homine corruptoriae conditionis habentur huiusmodi passiones, idcirco et in deo eiusdem status existimentur. Discerne substantias, et suos eis distribue sensus tam diversos quam substantiae exigunt, licet vocabulis communicare videantur. Nam et dexteram et oculos et pedes dei legimus, nec ideo tamen humanis comparabuntur quia de appellatione sociantur. Quanta erit diversitas divini corporis et humani sub eisdem nominibus membrorum, tanta erit et animi divini et humani differentia sub eisdem licet vocabulis sensuum, quos tam corruptorios efficit in homine corruptibilitas substantiae humanae quam incorruptorios in deo efficit incorruptibilitas substantiae divinae. [5] Certe deum confiteris creatorem? Certe, inquis. Quomodo ergo in deo humanum aliquid existimas, et non divinum omne? Quem deum non negas, confiteris non humanum, siquidem deum confitendo praeiudicasti utique illum ab omni humanarum conditionum qualitate diversum. Porro cum pariter agnoscas hominem a deo inflatum in animam vivam, non deum ab homine, satis perversum est ut in deo potius humana constituas quam in homine divina, et hominis imagine deum induas potius quam dei hominem. [6] Et haec ergo imago censenda est dei in homine, quod eosdem motus et sensus habeat humanus animus quos et deus, licet non tales quales deus; pro substantia enim et status eorum et exitus distant. Denique contrarios eorum sensus, lenitatem dico, patientiam, misericordiam, ipsamque matricem earum, bonitatem, cur divina praesumitis? Nec tamen perfecte ea obtinemus, quia solus deus perfectus. Ita et illas species, irae dico et exasperationis, non tam feliciter patimur, quia solus deus de incorruptibilitatis proprietate felix. [7] Irascetur enim sed non <quatietur>; exacerbabitur sed non periclitabitur; movebitur sed non evertetur. Omnia necesse est adhibeat propter omnia; tot sensus quot et causas; et iram propter scelestos, et bilem propter ingratos, et aemulationem propter superbos, et quicquid non expedit malis. Sic et misericordiam propter errantes, et patientiam propter non resipiscentes,  et praestantiam propter merentes, et quicquid bonis opus est. Quae omnia patitur suo more, quo eum pati condecet, propter quem homo eadem patitur aeque suo more.

Even His severity then is good, because just: when the judge is good, that is just. Other. qualities likewise are good, by means of which the good work of a good severity runs out its course, whether wrath, or jealousy, or sternness. For all these are as indispensable to severity as severity is to justice. The shamelessness of an age, which ought to have been reverent, had to be avenged. Accordingly, qualities which pertain to the judge, when they are actually free from blame, as the judge himself is, will never be able to be charged upon him as a fault. What would be said, if, when you thought the doctor necessary, you were to find fault with his instruments, because they cut, or cauterize, or amputate, or tighten; whereas there could be no doctor of any value without his professional tools? Censure, if you please, the practitioner who cuts badly, amputates clumsily, is rash in his cautery; and even blame his implements as rough tools of his art. Your conduct is equally unreasonable, when you allow indeed that God is a judge, but at the same time destroy those operations and dispositions by which He discharges His judicial functions. We are taught God by the prophets, and by Christ, not by the philosophers nor by Epicurus. We who believe that God really lived on earth, and took upon Him the low estate of human form, for the purpose of man's salvation, are very far from thinking as those do who refuse to believe that God cares for anything. Whence has found its way to the heretics an argument of this kind: 

If God is angry, and jealous, and roused, and grieved, He must therefore be corrupted, and must therefore die. 
[[bbl.torah#exod#c20#5]]

Fortunately, however, it is a part of the creed of Christians even to believe that God did die, and yet that He is alive for evermore. Superlative is their folly, who prejudge divine things from human; so 310

that, because in man's corrupt condition there are found passions of this description, therefore there must be deemed to exist in God also sensations of the same kind. Discriminate between the natures, and assign to them their respective senses, which are as diverse as their natures require, although they seem to have a community of designations. We read, indeed, of God's right hand, and eyes, and feet: these must not, however, be compared with those of human beings, because they are associated in one and the same name. Now, as great as shall be the difference between the divine and the human body, although their members pass under identical names, so great will also be the diversity between the divine and the human soul, notwithstanding that their sensations are designated by the same names. These sensations in the human being are rendered just as corrupt by the corruptibility of man's substance, as in God they are rendered incorruptible by the incorruption of the divine essence. Do you really believe the Creator to be God? By all means, is your reply. How then do you suppose that in God there is anything human, and not that all is divine? Him whom you do not deny to be God, you confess to be not human; because, when you confess Him to be God, you have, in fact, already determind that He is undoubtedly diverse from every sort of human conditions. Furthermore, although you allow, with others, that man was inbreathed by God into a living soul, not God by man, it is yet palpably absurd of you to be placing human characteristics in God rather than divine ones in man, and clothing God in the likeness of man, instead of man in the image of God. And this, therefore, is to be deemed the likeness of God in man, that the human soul have the same emotions and sensations as God, although they are not of the same kind; differing as they do both in their conditions and their issues according to their nature. Then, again, with respect to the opposite sensations,--I mean meekness, patience, mercy, and the very parent of them all, goodness,--why do you form your opinion of the divine displays of these (from the human qualities)? For we indeed do not possess them in perfection, because it is God alone who is perfect. So also in regard to those others,--namely, anger and irritation. we are not affected by them in so happy a manner, because God alone is truly happy, by reason of His property of incorruptibility. Angry He will possibly be, but not irritated, nor dangerously tempted; He will be moved, but not subverted. All appliances He must needs use, because of all contingencies; as many sensations as there are causes: anger because of the wicked, and indignation because of the ungrateful, and jealousy because of the proud, and whatsoever else is a hinderance to the evil. So, again, mercy on account of the erring, and patience on account of the impenitent, and pre-eminent resources on account of the meritorious, and whatsoever is necessary to the good. All these affections He is moved by in that peculiar manner of His own, in which it is profoundly fit that He should be affected; and it is owing to Him that man is also similarly affected in a way which is equally his own.
### c18
[1] Sed quae potius legis bona defendam quam quae haeresis concu<tere concu>piit ut talionis definitionem, oculum pro oculo, dentera pro dente, et livorem pro livore repetentis? Non enim iniuriae mutuo exercendae licentiam sapit, sed in totum cohibendae violentiae prospicit, ut quia durissimo et infideli in deum populo longum vel etiam incredibile videretur a deo expectare defensam, edicendam postea per prophetam, Mihi defensam, et ego defendam, dicit dominus, interim commissio iniuriae metu vicis statim occursurae repastinaretur, et licentia retributionis prohibitio esset provocationis, ut sic improbitas aestuata cessaret, dum secunda permissa prima terretur, et prima deterrita nec secunda committitur, qua et alias facilior timor talionis per eundem saporem passionis. Nihil amarius quam id ipsum pati quod feceris aliis. [2] Et si lex aliquid cibis detrahit et immunda pronuntiat animalia quae aliquando benedicta sunt, consilium exercendae continentiae intellege, et frenos impositos illi gulae agnosce quae cum panem ederet angelorum, cucumeres et pepones Aegyptiorum desiderabat. Agnosce simul et comitibus gulae, libidini scilicet atque luxuriae, prospectum, quae fere ventris castigatione frigescunt. Manducaverat enim populus et biberat et surrexerat ludere. Proinde ut et pecuniae ardor restringeretur ex parte qua de victus necessitate causatur, pretiosorum ciborum ambitio detracta est: postremo, ut facilius homo ad ieiunandum deo formaretur, paucis et non gloriosis escis assuefactus, et nihil de lautioribus esuriturus. [3] Reprehendendus sane creator quod cibos potius populo suo abstulit quam ingratioribus Marcionitis. Sacrificiorum quoque onera et operationum et oblationum negotiosas scrupulositates nemo reprehendat, quasi deus talia sibi proprie desideraverit, qui tam manifeste exclamat, Quo mihi multitudinem sacrificiorum vestrorum? et, Quis exquisivit ista de manibus vestris? sed illam dei industriam sentiat qua populum pronum in idololatriam et transgressionem eiusmodi officiis religioni suae voluit adstringere quibus superstitio saeculi agebatur, ut ab ea avocaret illos, sibi iubens fieri quasi desideranti, ne simulacris faciendis delinqueret.

But what parts of the law can I defend as good with a greater confidence than those which heresy has shown such a longing for?--

as the statute of retaliation, requiring eye for eye, tooth for tooth, and stripe for stripe. 
[[bbl.torah#exod#c21#24]]

Now there is not here any smack of a permission to mutual injury; but rather, on the whole, a provision for restraining violence. To a people which was very obdurate, and wanting in faith towards God, it might seem tedious, and even incredible, to expect from God that vengeance which was subsequently to be declared by the prophet: 

"Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." 

Therefore, in the meanwhile, the commission of wrong was to be checked by the fear of a retribution immediately to happen; and so the permission of this retribution was to be the prohibition of provocation, that a stop might thus be put to all hot-blooded injury, whilst by the permission of the second the first is prevented by fear, and by this deterring of the first the second fails to be committed. By the same law another result is also obtained, even the more ready kindling of the fear of retaliation by reason of the very savour of passion which is in it. There is no more bitter thing, than to endure the very suffering which you have inflicted upon others. When, again, the law took somewhat away from men's food, by pronouncing unclean certain animals which were once blessed, you should understand this to be a measure for encouraging continence, and recognise in it a bridle imposed on that appetite which, while eating angels' food, craved after the cucumbers and melons of the Egyptians. Recognise also therein a precaution against those companions of the appetite, even lust and luxury, which are usually chilled by the chastening of the appetite. For "the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play." Furthermore, that an eager wish for money might be restrained, so far as it is caused by the need of food, the desire for costly meat and drink was taken out of their power. Lastly, in order that man might be more readily educated by God for fasting, he was accustomed to such articles of food as were neither plentiful nor sumptuous, and not likely to pamper the appetite of the luxurious. Of course the Creator deserved all the greater blame, because it was from His own people that He took away food, rather than from the more ungrateful Marcionites. As for the burdensome sacrifices also, and the troublesome scrupulousness of their ceremonies and oblations, no one should blame them, as if God specially required them for Himself: for He plainly asks, "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?" and, 312

"Who hath required them at your hand?" But he should see herein a careful provision on God's part, which showed His wish to bind to His own religion a people who were prone to idolatry and transgression by that kind of services wherein consisted the superstition of that period; that He might call them away therefrom, while requesting it to be performed to Himself, as if He desired that no sin should be committed in making idols.
### c24
[1] Sic et paenitentiam apud illum prave interpretaris, quasi proinde mobilitate vel improvidentia, immo iam ex delicti recordatione paeniteat, quoniam quidem dixerit, Paenituit quod regem fecerim Saul, praescribens scilicet paenitentiam confessionem sapere mali operis alicuius vel erroris. Porro non semper. Evenit enim in bonis factis paenitentiae confessio ad invidiam et exprobrationem eius qui beneficii ingratus extiterit, [2] sicut et tunc circa personam Saulis honorandam annuntiatur a creatore, qui non deliquerat cum Saulem assumit in regnum et sancto spiritu auget; optimum enim adhuc, qualis, inquit, non erat in filiis Israelis, dignissime adlegerat. Sed nec ignoraverat ita eventurum. Nemo enim te sustinebit improvidentiam adscribentem deo ei quem deum non negans confiteris et providum. Haec enim illi propria divinitas constat. Sed malum factum Saulis, ut dixi, onerabat paenitentiae suae professione, quam vacante delicto circa Saulis adlectionem consequens est invidiosam potius intellegi, non criminosam. Ecce, inquis, criminosam eam animadverto circa Ninivitas, dicente scriptura Ionae, Et paenituit dominum de malitia quam dixerat facturum se illis, nec fecit. Sicut et ipse Ionas ad dominum, Propterea praeveni profugere in Tarsos, quia cognoveram te esse misericordem et miserescentem, patientem et plurimum misericordiae, paenitentem malitiarum. [3] Bene igitur quod praemisit optimi dei titulum, patientissimi scilicet super malos et abundantissimi misericordiae et miserationis super agnoscentes et deplangentes delicta sua, quales tunc Ninivitae. Si enim optimus qui talis, de isto prius cessisse debebis, non competere in talem, id est in optimum, etiam malitiae concursum. Et quia et Marcion defendit arborem bonam malos quoque fructus non licere producere, sed malitiam tamen nominavit, quod optimus non capit, numquid aliqua interpretatio subest earum malitiarum intellegendarum quae possint et in optimum decucurrisse? Subest autem. [4] Dicimus denique malitiam nunc significari non quae ad naturam redigatur creatoris, quasi mali, sed quae ad potestatem, quasi iudicis; secundum quam enuntiarit, Ego sum qui condo mala, et, Ecce ego emitto in vos mala, non peccatoria sed ultoria, quorum satis diluimus infamiam ut congruentium iudici. Sicut autem, licet mala dicantur, non reprehenduntur in iudice, nec hoc nomine suo malum iudicem ostendunt, ita et malitia haec erit intellegenda nunc quae ex illis malis iudiciariis deputata cum ipsis competat iudici. [5] Nam et apud Graecos interdum malitiae pro vexationibus et laesuris, non pro malignitatibus ponuntur, sicut et in isto articulo. Atque adeo si eius malitiae paenituit creatorem, quasi creaturae reprobandae scilicet et deletui vindicandae, atqui nec hic ullum admissum criminosum reputabitur creatori, qui iniquissimam civitatem digne meritoque decreverat abolendam. [6] Ita quod iuste destinaverat non male destinans, ex iustitia non ex malitia destinarat; sed poenam ipsam malitiam nominavit ex malo et merito passionis ipsius. Ergo, dices, si malitiam iustitiae nomine excusas, quia iuste exitium destinarat in Ninivitas, sic quoque culpandus est, qui iustitiae utique non paenitendae paenitentiam gessit. Immo nec iustitiae, inquam, paenitebit deum, et superest iam agnoscere quid sit paenitentia dei. Non enim, si hominem ex recordatione plurimum delicti, interdum et ex alicuius boni operis ingratia paenitet, ideo et deum proinde. [7] In quantum enim deus nec malum admittit nec bonum damnat, in tantum nec paenitentiae boni aut mali apud eum locus est. Nam et hoc tibi eadem scriptura determinat, dicente Samuele Sauli, Discidit dominus regnum Israelis de manu tua hodie et dabit illud proximo tuo, optimo super te, et scindetur Israel in duas partes, et non convertetur neque paenitentiam aget, quia non sicut homo est ad paenitendum. [8] Haec itaque definitio in omnibus aliam formam divinac paenitentiae statuit, quae neque ex improvidentia neque ex levitate neque ex ulla boni aut mali operis damnatione reputetur, sicut humana. Quis ergo erit mos paenitentiae divinae? Iam relucet, si non ad humanas condiciones eam referas. Nihil enim aliud intellegetur quam simplex conversio sententiae prioris, quae etiam sine reprehensione eius possit admitti, etiam in homine, nedum in deo, cuius omnis sententia caret culpa. Nam et in Graeco sono paenitentiae nomen non ex delicti confessione, sed ex animi demutatione compositum est, quam apud deum pro rerum variantium sese occursu regi ostendimus.

Furthermore, with respect to the repentance which occurs in His conduct? you interpret it with similar perverseness just as if it were with fickleness and improvidence that He repented, or on the recollection of some wrong-doing; because He actually said, 

"It repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king, "
[[bbl.history.neviim#1_samuel#c15#11]]

very much as if He meant that His repentance savoured of an acknowledgment of some evil work or error. Well, this is not always implied. For there occurs even in good works a confession of repentance, as a reproach and condemnation of the man who has proved himself unthankful for a benefit. For instance, in this case of Saul, the Creator, who had made no mistake in selecting him for the kingdom, and endowing him with His Holy Spirit, makes a statement respecting the goodliness of his person, how that He had most fitly chosen him as being at that moment the choicest man, so that (as He says) there was not his fellow among the children of Israel. Neither was He ignorant how he would afterwards turn out. For no one would bear you out in imputing lack of foresight to that God whom, since you do not deny Him to be divine, you allow to be also foreseeing; for this proper attribute of divinity exists in Him. However, He did, as I have said, burden the guilt of Saul with the confession of His own repentance; but as there is an absence of all error and wrong in His choice of Saul, it follows that this repentance is to be understood as upbraiding another rather than as self-incriminating. Look here then, say you: I discover a self-incriminating case in the matter of the Ninevites, when the book of Jonah declares, "And God repented of the evil that He had said that He would do unto them; and He did it not." In accordance with which Jonah himself says unto the Lord, "Therefore I fled before unto Tarshish; for I knew that Thou art a gracious God and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest Thee of the evil." It is well, therefore, that he premised the attribute of the most good God as most patient over the wicked, and most abundant in mercy and kindness over such as acknowledged and bewailed their sins, as the Ninevites were then doing. For if He who has this attribute is the Most Good, you will have first to relinquish that position of yours, that the very contact with evil is incompatible with such a Being, that is, with the most good God.


Luke:6:43
[[bbl.evngl#luke#c6#43]]
And because 316 Marcion, too, maintains that a good tree ought not to produce bad fruit; 

but yet he has mentioned "evil" (in the passage under discussion), which the most good God is incapable of, is there forthcoming any explanation of these "evils," which may render them compatible with even the most Good? There is, We say, in short, that evil in the present case means, not what may be attributed to the Creator's nature as an evil being, but what may be attributed to His power as a judge. 

Isaiah:45:7
[[bbl.prop.nev#isaiah#c45#7]]
In accordance with which He declared, "I
create evil," 

and, "I frame evil against you;" 

meaning not to sinful evils, but avenging ones. 

What sort of stigmas pertains to these, congruous as they are with God's judicial character, we have sufficiently explained. Now although these are called "evils," they are yet not reprehensible in a judge; nor because of this their name do they show that the judge is evil: so in like manner will this particular evil be understood to be one of this class of judiciary evils, and along with them to be compatible with (God as) a judge.
### c25
[1] Iam nunc, ut omnia eiusmodi expediam, ad ceteras pusillitates et infirmitates et incongruentias, ut putatis, interpretandas purgandasque pertendam. Inclamat deus, Adam, ubi es? scilicet ignorans ubi esset, et causato nuditatis pudore an de arbore gustasset interrogat, scilicet incertus. Immo nec incertus admissi nec ignorans loci. Enimvero oportebat conscientia peccati delitescentem evocatum prodire in conspectum domini, non sola nominis inclamatione, sed cum aliqua iam tunc admissi suggillatione. [2] Nec enim simplici modo, id est interrogatorio sono legendum est, Ubi es, Adam? sed impresso et incusso et imputativo, Adam, ubi es! id est in perditione es, id est iam hic non es, ut et increpandi et dolendi exitus vox sit. Ceterum qui totum orbem comprehendit manu velut nidum, cuius caelum thronus et terra scabellum, nimirum huius oculos aliqua paradisi portio evaserat, quominus illi ubicunque Adam ante evocationem viseretur tam latens quam de interdicta fruge sumens? [3] Speculatorem vineae vel horti tui lupus aut furunculus non latet. Deum puto de sublimioribus oculatiorem aliquid subiecti praeterire non posse. Stulte, qui tantum argumentum divinae maiestatis et humanae instructionis naso agis. Interrogat deus quasi incertus, ut et hic liberi arbitrii probans hominem in causa aut negationis aut confessionis daret ei locum sponte confitendi delictum et hoc nomine relevandi. Sicut de Cain sciscitatur ubinam frater eius; quasi non iam vociferatum a terra sanguinem Abelis audisset: sed ut et ille haberet potestatem ex eadem arbitrii potestate sponte negandi delicti et hoc nomine gravandi, atque ita nobis conderentur exempla confitendorum potius delictorum quam negandorum; ut iam tunc initiaretur evangelica doctrina, Ex ore tuo iustificaberis et ex ore tuo damnaberis. [4] Nam etsi Adam propter statum legis deditus morti est, sed spes ei salva est, dicente domino, Ecce Adam factus est tanquam unus ex nobis, de futura scilicet adlectione hominis in divinitatem. Denique quid sequitur? Et nunc, ne quando extendat manum et sumat de ligno vitae et vivat in aevum. Interponens enim, Et nunc, praesentis temporis verbum, temporalem et ad praesens dilationem vitae fecisse se ostendit. [5] Ideoque nec maledixit ipsum Adam et Evam, ut restitutionis candidatos, ut confessione relevatos. Cain vero et maledixit et cupidum morte luere delictum mori interim vetuit, ut praeter admissum etiam negationis eius oneratum. Haec erit ignorantia dei nostri, quae ideo simulabatur ne delinquens homo quid sibi agendum sit ignoret. [6] Sed ad Sodomam et Gomorram descendens, Videbo, ait, si secundum clamorem pervenientem ad me consummantur, si vero non, ut agnoscam. Et hic videlicet ex ignorantia incertus et scire cupidus? An hic sonus pronuntiationis necessarius, non dubitativum, sed comminativum exprimens sensum, sub sciscitationis obtentu? Quodsi descensum quoque dei irrides, quasi aliter non potuerit perficere iudicium nisi descendisset, vide ne tuum aeque deum pulses. Nam et ille descendit ut quod vellet efficeret.

It is now high time that I should, in order to meet all objections of this kind, proceed to the explanation and clearing up of the other trifles, weak points, and inconsistencies, as you deemed them. 

God calls out to Adam, Where art thou? 
[[bbl.torah#gen#c3#9]]

as if ignorant where he was; 

and when he alleged that the shame of his nakedness was the cause (of his hiding himself), He inquired whether he had eaten of the tree, 
[[bbl.torah#gen#c3#11]]

as if He were in doubt. By no means; God was neither uncertain about the commission of the sin, nor ignorant of Adam's whereabouts. It was certainly proper to summon the offender, who was concealing himself from the consciousness of his sin, and to bring him forth into the presence of his Lord, not merely by the calling out of his name, but 317

with a home-thrust blow at the sin which he had at that moment committed. 

For the question ought not to be read in a merely interrogative tone, 

Where art thou, Adam? 

but with an impressive and earnest voice, and with an air of imputation, 

Oh, Adam, where art thou?--

as much as to intimate: thou art no longer here, thou art in perdition--so that the voice is the utterance of One who is at once rebuking and sorrowing. 

But of course some part of paradise had escaped the eye of Him who holds the universe in His hand as if it were a bird's nest, and to whom heaven is a throne and earth a footstool; so that He could not see, before He summoned him forth, where Adam was, both while lurking and when eating of the forbidden fruit! The wolf or the paltry thief escapes not the notice of the keeper of your vineyard or your garden! And God, I suppose, with His keener vision, from on high was unable to miss the sight of aught which lay beneath Him! Foolish heretic, who treat with scorn so fine an argument of God's greatness and man's instruction! God put the question with an appearance of uncertainty, in order that even here He might prove man to be the subject of a free will in the alternative of either a denial or a confession, and give to him the opportunity of freely ackowledging his transgression, and, so far, of lightening it. In like manner He inquires of Cain where his brother was, just as if He had not yet heard the blood of Abel crying from the ground, in order that he too might have the opportunity from the same power of the will of spontaneously denying, and to this degree aggravating, his crime; and that thus there might be supplied to us examples of confessing sins rather than of denying them: so that even then was initiated the evangelic doctrine, "By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned."

Now, although Adam was by reason of his condition under law subject to death, yet was hope preserved to him by the Lord's saying, "Behold, Adam is become as one of us;" that is, in consequence of the future taking of the man into the divine nature. Then what follows? "And now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, (and eat), and live for ever." Inserting thus the particle of present time, "And now," He shows that He had made for a time, and at present, a prolongation of man's life. Therefore He did not actually curse Adam and Eve, for they were candidates for restoration, and they had been relieved by confession. Cain, however, He not only cursed; but when he wished to atone for his sin by death, He even prohibited his dying, so that he had to bear the load of this prohibition in addition to his crime. This, then, will prove to be the ignorance of our God, which was simulated on this account, that delinquent man should not be unaware of what he ought to do. Coming down to the case of Sodom and Gomorrha, he says: "I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it which is come unto me; and if not, I will know." Well, was He in this instance also uncertain through ignorance, and desiring to know? Or was this a necessary tone of utterance, as expressive of a minatory and not a dubious sense, under the colour of an inquiry? If you make merry at God's "going down," as if He could not except by the descent have accomplished His judgment, take care that you do not strike your own God with as hard a blow. For He also came down to accomplish what He wished.
### c29
[1] Ceterum ipsas quoque Antitheses Marcionis cominus cecidissem, si operosiore destructione earum egeret defensio creatoris tam boni quam et iudicis, secundum utriusque partis exempla congruentia deo, ut ostendimus. Quodsi utraque pars bonitatis atque iustitiae dignam plenitudinem divinitatis efficiunt omnia potentis, compendio interim possum antitheses retudisse, gestientes ex qualitatibus ingeniorum sive legum sive virtutum discernere, atque ita alienare Christum a creatore, ut optimum a iudice, et mitem a fero, et salutarem ab exitioso. [2] Magis enim eos coniungunt quos in eis diversitatibus ponunt quae deo congruunt. Aufer titulum Marcionis et intentionem atque propositum operis ipsius, et nihil aliud praestaret quam demonstrationem eiusdem dei optimi et iudicis, quia haec duo in solum deum competunt. Nam et ipsum studium in eis exemplis opponendi Christum creatori ad unitatem magis spectat. [3] Adeo enim ipsa et una erat substantia divinitatis, bona et severa, et eisdem exemplis et in similibus argumentis, ut bonitatem suam voluerit ostendere in quibus praemiserat severitatem; quia nec mirum erat diversitas temporalis, si postea dens mitior pro rebus edomitis, qui retro austerior pro indomitis. Ita per antitheses facilius ostendi potest ordo creatoris a Christo refonnatus quam repercussus, et redditus potius quam exclusus, praesertim <cum> deum tuum ab omni motu amariore secernas, utique et ab aemulatione creatoris scilicet. [4] Nam si ita est, quomodo eum antitheses singulas species creatoris aemulatum demonstrant? Agnoscam igitur et in hoc per illas deum meum zeloten, qui res suas arbustiores in primordiis bona, ut rationali, aemulatione maturitatis praecuraverit suo iure, cuius antitheses etiam ipse mundus eius agnoscet ex contrarietatibus elementorum, summa tamen ratione modulatus. Quam ob rem, inconsiderantissime Marcion, alium deum lucis ostendisse debueras, alium vero tenebraram, quo facilius alium bonitatis, alium severitatis persuasisses. Ceterum eius erit antithesis cuius est et in mundo.

But I would have attacked Marcion's own Antitheses in closer and fuller combat, if a more elaborate demolition of them were required in maintaining for the Creator the character of a good God and a Judge, alters the examples of both points, which we have shown to be so worthy of God. Since, however, these two attributes of goodness and justice do together make up the proper fulness of the Divine Being as omnipotent, I am able to content myself with having now compendiously refuted his Antitheses, which aim at drawing distinctions out of the qualities of the (Creator's) artifices, or of His laws, or of His great works; and thus sundering Christ from the Creator, as the most Good from the Judge, as One who is merciful from Him who is ruthless, and One who brings salvation from Him who causes ruin. The truth is, they rather unite the two Beings whom they arrange in those diversities (of attribute), which yet are compatible in God. For only take away the title of Marcion's book, and the intention and purpose of the work itself, and you could get no better demonstration that the self-same God was both very good and a Judge, inasmuch as these two characters are only competently found in God. Indeed, the very effort which is made in the selected examples to oppose Christ to the Creator, conduces all the more to their union. For so entirely one and the same was the nature of the Divine Beings, the good and the severe, as shown both by the same examples and in similar proofs, that It willed to display Its goodness to those on whom It had first inflicted Its severity. The difference in time was no matter of surprise, when the same God was afterwards merciful in presence of evils which had been subdued, who had once been so austere whilst they were as yet unsubdued. Thus, by help of the Antitheses, the dispensation of the Creator can be more readily shown to have been reformed by Christ, rather than destroyed; restored, rather than abolished; especially as you sever your own god from everything like acrimonious conduct, even from all rivalry whatsoever with the Creator. Now, since this is the case, how comes it to pass that the Antitheses demonstrate Him to have been the Creator's rival in every disputed cause? 

Well, even here, too, I will allow that in these causes 

my God has been a jealous God, 
[[bbl.torah#exod#c20#5]]

who has in His own right taken especial care that all things done by Him should be in their beginning of a robuster growth; and this in the way of a good, because rational emulation, which tends to maturity. In this sense the world itself will acknowledge His "antitheses," from the contrariety of its own elements, although it has been regulated with the very highest reason. Wherefore, most thoughtless Marcion, it was your duty to have shown that one (of the two Gods you teach) was a God of light, and the other a God of darkness; and then you would have found it an easier task to persuade us that one was a God of goodness, the other a God of severity. How ever, the "antithesis" (or variety of administration) will rightly be His property, to whom it actually belongs in (the government of) the world.
## b4
### c16
[1] Sed vobis dico, inquit, qui auditis (ostendens hoc olim mandatum a creatore, Loquere in aures audientium), diligite inimicos vestros, et benedicite eos qui vos oderunt, et orate pro eis qui vos calumniantur. Haec creator una pronuntiatione clusit per Esaiam: Dicite, fratres nostri estis, eis qui vos oderunt. Si enim qui inimici sunt et oderunt et maledicunt et calumniantur fratres appellandi sunt, utique et benedici odientes et orari pro calumniatoribus iussit, qui eos fratres deputari praecepit. [2] Novam plane patientiam docet Christus, etiam vicem iniuriae cohibens permissam a creatore, oculum exigente pro oculo et dentem pro dente, contra ipse alteram amplius maxillam offerri iubens, et super tunicam pallio quoque cedi. Plane haec Christus adiecerit ut supplementa consentanea disciplinae creatoris. Atque adeo hoc statim renuntiandum est, an disciplina patientiae praedicatur penes creatorem. [3] Si per Zachariam praecepit ne unusquisque malitiae fratris sui meminerit, sed nec proximi. Nam et rursus, Malitiam, inquit, proximi sui unusquisque ne recogitet. Multo magis patientiam indixit iniuriae qui indixit oblivionem. Sed et cum dicit, Mihi vindictam, et ego vindicabo, proinde patientiam docet vindictae expectatricem. [4] In quantum ergo fidem non capit ut idem videatur et dentem pro dente, oculum pro oculo, in vicem iniuriae exigere qui non modo vicem, sed etiam ultionem, etiam recordationem et recogitationem iniuriae prohibet, in tantum aperitur nobis quomodo oculum pro oculo et dentem pro dente censuerit, non ad secundam iniuriam talionis permittendam, quam prohibuerat interdicta ultione, sed ad primam coercendam, quam prohibuerat talione opposito, ut unusquisque respiciens licentiam secundae iniuriae a prima semetipsum contineret. [5] Facilius enim vim comprimi scit repraesentatione talionis quam repromissione ultionis. Utrumque autem constituendum fuit pro natura et fide hominum, ut qui deo crederet ultionem a deo expectaret, qui minus fideret leges talionis timeret. Hanc legis voluntatem de intellectu laborantem dominus et sabbati et legis et omnium paternarum dispositionum Christus et revelavit et compotem fecit, mandans alterius quoque maxillae oblationem, ut tanto magis vicem iniuriae extingueret quam et lex per talionem voluerat impedisse, certe quam prophetia manifeste coercuerat, et memoriam iniuriae prohibens et ultionem ad deum redigens. [6] Ita si quid Christus intulit, non adversario sed adiutore praecepto, non destruxit disciplinas creatoris. Denique si in ipsam rationem patientiae praecipiendae, et quidem tam plenae atque perfectae, considerem, non consistet si non est creatoris, qui vindictam repromittit, qui iudicem praestat. Alioquin si tantum patientiae pondus non modo non repercutiendi sed et aliam maxillam praebendi, et non modo non remaledicendi sed etiam benedicendi, et non modo non retinendi tunicam sed et amplius et pallium concedendi, is mihi imponit qui non sit me defensurus, in vacuum patientiam praecepit, non exhibens mihi mercedem praecepti, patientiae dico fructum, quod est ultio, quam mihi permisisse debuerat si ipse non praestat, aut si mihi non permittebat ipse praestare, quoniam et disciplinae interest iniuriam vindicari. [7] Metu enim ultionis omnis iniquitas refrenatur. Ceterum passim emissa libertate dominabitur, utrumque oculum effossura et omnem dentem excitatura prae impunitatis securitate. Sed hoc est dei optimi et tantum boni, patientiae iniuriam facere, violentiae ianuam pandere, probos non defendere, improbos non coercere. [8] Omni petenti te dato, utique indigenti, vel tanto magis indigenti si etiam et abundanti. Ne quis ergo indigeat, datori imperatam habes in Deuteronomio formam creatoris. Non erit, inquit, in te indigehs, uti benedicens benedicat te dominus deus tuus, datorem scilicet, qui fecerit non esse indigentem. [9] Et plus hic. Non enim petenti iubet dari: Sed non sit, inquit, indigens in te, id est cura ultro ne sit; quo magis petenti praeiudicat dandum. Etiam in sequentibus: Si autem fuerit indigens e fratribus tuis, non avertes cor tuum, nec constringes manum tuam a fratre indigente: aperiens aperies illi manum, fenus fenerabis illi, quantum desiderarit. [10] Fenus enim nisi petenti dari non solet. Sed de fenore postmodum. Nunc si qui voluerit argumentari creatorem quidem fratribus dari iussisse, Christum vero omnibus petentibus, ut hoc sit novum atque diversum, immo unum erit ex his per quae lex creatoris erit in Christo. Non enim aliud Christus in omnes praecepit quam quod creator in fratres. Nam etsi maior est bonitas quae operatur in extraneos, sed non prior ea quae ante deberet in proximos. [11] Quis enim poterit diligere extraneos? Quodsi secundus gradus bonitatis est in extraneos qui in proximos primus est, eiusdem erit secundus gradus cuius et primus, facilius quam ut eius sit secundus cuius non extitit primus. Ita creator et secundum naturae ordinem primum in proximos docuit benignitatem, emissurus eam postea in extraneos, et secundum rationem dispositionis suae primo in Iudaeos, postea et in omne hominum genus. [12] Ideoque quamdiu intra Israelem erat sacramentum, merito in solos fratres misericordiam mandabat; at ubi Christo dedit gentes haereditatem et possessionem terminos terrae, et coepit expungi quod dictum est per Osee: Non populus meus populus meus, et non misericordiam consecuta misericordiam consecuta, natio scilicet, exinde Christus in omnes legem paternae benignitatis extendit, neminem excipiens in miseratione, sicut in vocatione. Ita et si quid amplius docuit, hoc quoque in haereditatem gentium accepit. [13] Et sicut vobis fieri vultis ab hominibus, ita et vos facite illis. In isto praecepto utique alia pars eius subauditur: Et sicut vobis non vultis fieri ab hominibus, ita et vos ne faciatis illis. Hoc si novus deus et ignotus retro et nondum plane editus praecepit, qui me nulla antehac institutione formaverit, qua prius scirem quid deberem mihi velle vel nolle atque ita et aliis facere quae et mihi vellem, non facere quae et mihi nollem, passivitatem sententiae meae permisit, nec adstrinxit me ad convenientiam voluntatis et facti, ut id aliis faciam quod mihi velim et id nec aliis faciam quod mihi nolim. [14] Non enim definiit quid mihi atque aliis debeam velle vel nolle, ut ad legem voluntatis parem factum, et possim alii non praestare quod ab alio mihi velim praestitum, amorem, obsequium, solatium, praesidium, et eiusmodi bona, proinde et alii facere quod ab alio mihi fieri nolim, vim, iniuriam, contumeliam, fraudem, et eiusmodi mala. Denique hac inconvenientia voluntatis et facti agunt ethnici nondum a deo instructi. [15] Nam etsi natura bonum et malum notum est, non tamen dei disciplina; qua cognita tunc demum convenientia voluntatis et facti ex fide, ut sub metu dei, agitur. Itaque deus Marcionis cum maxime revelatus, si tamen revelatus, non potuit huius praecepti de quo agitur tam strictum et obscurum et caecum adhuc et facilius pro meo potius arbitrio interpretandum compendium emittere, cuius nullam praestruxerat distinctionem. [16] At enim creator meus et olim et ubique praecepit indigentes pauperes et pupillos et viduas protegi, iuvari, refrigerari; sicut et per Esaiam: Infringito panem tuum mendicis, et qui sine tecto sunt, in domum tuam inducito, et nudum si videris, tegito. Item per Ezechielem de viro iusto: Panem suum dabit esurienti, et nudum conteget. Satis ergo iam tunc me docuit ea facere aliis quae mihi velim fieri. [17] Proinde denuntians, Non occides, Non adulterabis, Non furaberis, Non falsum testimonium dices, docuit ne faciam aliis quae fieri mihi nolim; et ideo ipsius erit praeceptum in evangelio qui illud retro et praestruxit et distinxit et ad arbitrium disciplinae suae disposuit et merito iam compendio substrinxit: quoniam et alias recisum sermonem facturus in terris dominus, id est Christus, praedicabatur.

"But I say unto you which hear" 

(displaying here that old injunction, of the Creator: 

"Speak to the ears of those who lend them to you"), 

"Love your enemies, and bless those which hate you, and pray for them which calumniate you." 

These commands the Creator included in one precept by His prophet Isaiah: 

"Say, Ye are our brethren, to those who hate you." 

For if they who are our enemies, and hate us, and speak evil of us, and calumniate us, are to be called our brethren, surely He did in effect bid us bless them that hate us, and pray for them who calumniate us, when He instructed us to reckon them as brethren. Well, but Christ plainly teaches a new kind of patience, when He actually prohibits the reprisals which the Creator permitted in requiring 

"an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth," 
[[bbl.torah#exod#c21#24]]

and bids us, on the contrary, 

"to him who smiteth us on the one cheek, to offer the other also, 
[[bbl.evngl#matthew#c5#39]]
and to give up our coat to him that taketh away our cloak." 
[[bbl.evngl#matthew#c5#40]]

No doubt these are supplementary additions by Christ, but they are quite in keeping with the teaching of the Creator. And therefore this question must at once be determined, Whether the discipline of patience be enjoined by the Creator? When by Zechariah He commanded, 

"Let none of you imagine evil against his brother," He did not expressly include his neighbour; but then in another passage He says, 

"Let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against his neighbour." 

He who counselled that an injury should be forgotten, was still more likely to counsel the patient endurance of it. But then, when He said, 

"Vengeance is mine, and I will repay," 

He thereby teaches that patience calmly waits for the infliction of vengeance. Therefore, inasmuch as it is incredible that the same (God) should seem to require 

"a tooth for a tooth and an eye for an eye," 

in return for an injury, who forbids not only all reprisals, but even a revengeful thought or recollection of an injury, in so far does it become plain to us in what sense He required 

"an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth,"--

not, indeed, for the purpose of permitting the repetition of the injury by retaliating it, which it virtually prohibited when it forbade vengeance; but for the purpose of restraining the injury in the first instance, which it had forbidden on pain of retaliation or reciprocity; so that every man, in view of the permission to inflict a second (or retaliatory) injury, might abstain from the commission of the first (or provocative) wrong. For He knows how much more easy it is to repress violence by the prospect of retaliation, than by the promise of (indefinite) vengeance. Both results, however, it was necessary to provide, in consideration of the nature and the faith of men, that the man who believed in God might expect vengeance from God, while he who had no faith (to restrain him) might fear the laws which prescribed retaliation. This purpose of the law, which it was difficult to understand, Christ, as the Lord of the Sabbath and of the law, and of all the dispensations of the Father, both revealed and made intelligible, when He commanded that 

"the other cheek should be offered (to the smiter)," 

in order that He might the more effectually extinguish all reprisals of an injury, which the law had wished to prevent by the method of retaliation, (and) which most certainly revelation had manifestly restricted, both by prohibiting the memory of the wrong, and referring the vengeance thereof to God. Thus, whatever (new

provision) Christ introduced, He did it not in opposition to the law, but rather in furtherance of it, without at all impairing the prescription of the Creator. If, therefore, one looks carefully into the very grounds for which patience is enjoined (and trial to such a full and complete extent), one finds that it cannot stand if it is not the precept of the Creator, who promises vengeance, who presents Himself as the judge (in the case). If it were not so,--if so vast a weight of patience--which is to refrain from giving blow for blow; which is to offer the other cheek; which is not only not to return railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing; and which, so far from keeping the coat, is to give up the cloak also--is laid upon me by one who means not to help me,-- (then all I can say is,) he has taught me patience to no purpose, because he shows me no reward to his precept--I mean no fruit of such patience. There is revenge which he ought to have permitted me to take, if he meant not to inflict it himself; if he did not give me that permission, then he should himself have inflicted it; since it is for the interest of discipline itself that an injury should be avenged. For by the fear of vengeance all iniquity is curbed. But if licence is allowed to it without discrimination, it will get the mastery--it will put out (a man's) both eyes; it will knock out every tooth in the safety of its impunity. This, however, is (the principle) of your good and simply beneficent god--to do a wrong to patience, to open the door to violence, to leave the righteous undefended, and the wicked unrestrained! 

"Give to every one that asketh of thee"

--to the indigent of course, or rather to the indigent more especially, although to the affluent likewise. But in order that no man may be indigent, you have in Deuteronomy a provision commanded by the Creator to the creditor. 

"There shall not be in thine hand an indigent man; so that the Lord thy God shall bless thee with blessings,"--

thee meaning the creditor to whom it was owing that the man was not indigent. But more than this. To one who does not ask, He bids a gift to be given. 

"Let there be, not," He says, "a poor man in thine hand;" 

in other words, see that there be not, so far as thy will can prevent; by which command, too, He all the more strongly by inference requires men to give to him that asks, as in the following words also: 

"If there be among you a poor man of thy brethren, thou shalt not turn away thine heart, nor shut thine hand from thy poor brother. But thou shalt open thine hand wide unto him, and shalt surely lend him as much as he wanteth," 

Loans are not usually given, except to such as ask for them. On this subject of lending, however, more hereafter. Now, should any one wish to argue that the Creator's precepts extended only to a man's brethren, but Christ's to all that ask, so as to make the latter a new and different precept, (I have to reply) that one rule only can be made out of those principles, which show the law of the Creator to be repeated in Christ. For that is not a different thing which Christ enjoined to be done towards all men, from that which the Creator prescribed in favour of a man's brethren. For although that is a greater charity, which is shown to strangers, it is yet not preferable to that which was previously due to one's neighbours. For what man will be able to bestow the love (which proceeds from knowledge of character, upon strangers? Since, however, the second step in charity is towards strangers, while the first is towards one's neighbours, the second step will belong to him to whom the first also belongs, more fitly than the second will belong to him who owned no first. Accordingly, the Creator, when following the course of nature, taught in the first instance kindness to neighbours, intending afterwards to enjoin it towards strangers; and when following the method of His dispensation, He limited charity first to the Jews, but afterwards extended it to the whole race of mankind. So long, therefore, as the mystery of His government was confined to Israel, He properly commanded that pity should be shown only to a man's brethren; 

but when Christ had given to Him "the Gentiles for His heritage, and the ends of the earth for His possession," 

then began to be accomplished what was said by Hosea: 

"Ye are not my people, who were my people; ye have not obtained mercy, who once obtained mercy"--

that is, the (Jewish) nation. Thenceforth Christ extended to all men the law of His Father's compassion, excepting none from His mercy, as He omitted none in His invitation. So that, whatever was the ampler scope of His teaching, He received it all in His heritage of the nations. 

"And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise." 

In this command is no doubt implied its counterpart: 

"And as ye would not that men should do to you, so should ye also not do to them likewise." 

Now, if this were the teaching of the new and previously unknown and not yet fully proclaimed deity, who had favoured me with no instruction beforehand, whereby I might first learn what I ought to choose or to refuse for myself, and to do to others what I would wish done to myself, not doing to them what I should be unwilling to have done to myself, it would certainly be nothing else than the chance-medley of my own sentiments which he would have left to me, binding me to no proper rule of wish or action, in order that I might do to others what I would like for myself, or refrain from doing to others what I should dislike to have done to myself. For he has not, in fact, defined what I ought to wish or not to wish for myself as well as for others, so that I shape my conduct according to the law of my own will, and have it in my power not to render to another what I would like to have rendered to myself--love, obedience, consolation, protection, and such like blessings; and in like manner to do to another what I should be unwilling to have done to myself--violence, wrong, insult, deceit, and evils of like sort. Indeed, the heathen who have not been instructed by God act on this incongruous liberty of the will and the conduct. For although good and evil are severally known by nature, yet life is not thereby spent under the discipline of God, which alone at last teaches men the proper liberty of their will and action in faith, as in the fear of God. The god of Marcion, therefore, although specially revealed, was, in spite of his revelation, unable to publish any summary of the precept in question, which had hitherto been so confined, and obscure, and dark, and admitting of no ready interpretation, except according to my own arbitrary thought, because he had provided no previous dis
### c21
1] Dimittit discipulos ad praedicandum dei regnum. Numquid vel hic edidit cuius? Prohibet eos victui aut vestitui quid in viam ferre. Quis hoc mandasset, nisi qui et corvos alit et flores agri vestit, qui bovi quoque terenti libertatem oris ad veniam pabuli ex opere summovendi ante praecepit, quia dignus operarius mercede sua? Haec Marcion deleat, dum sensui salva sint. At cum iubet pulverem excutere de pedibus in eos a quibus excepti non fuissent, et hoc in testimonium mandat fieri. [2] Nemo testatur quod non iudicio destinatur; inhumanitatem qui in testationem redigi iubet, iudicem comminatur. Nullum deum novum a Christo probatum illa etiam opinio omnium declaravit, qnia Christum Iesum alii Ioannem, alii Heliam, alii unum aliquem ex veteribus prophetis Herodi adseverabant. Ex quibus quicunque fuisset, non utique ob hoc est suscitatus ut alium deum post resurrectionem praedicaret. Pascit populum in solitudine, de pristino scilicet more. [3] Aut si non eadem et maiestas, ergo iam minor est creatore, qui non uno die sed annis quadraginta, nec de inferioribus materiis panis et piscis sed de manna caelesti, nec quinque circiter sed sexcenta milia hominum protelavit. [4] Adeo autem ea fuit maiestas ut et pabuli exiguitatem non tantum sufficere, veram etiam exuberare de pristino voluerit exemplo. Sic enim et in tempore famis sub Helia viduae Sareptensi modica et suprema alimenta ex prophetae benedictione per totum famis tempus redundaverant. Habes tertiam Basiliarum. [5] Si et quartam resolvas, invenies totum hunc ordinem Christi circa illum dei hominem qui oblatos sibi decem hordeaceos panes cum populo distribui iussisset, et minister eius proinde comparata multitudine et pabuli mediocritate respondisset, Quid ego hoc dem in conspectu centum hominum? Da, inquit, et manducabunt, quoniam haec dicit dominus, Manducabunt et relinquent reliquias secundum dictum domini. O Christum et in novis veterem! [6] Haec itaque qui viderat Petrus et cum pristinis compararat, et non tantum retro facta, sed et in futurum iam tunc prophetantia recognoverat, interroganti domino quisnam illis videretur, cum pro omnibus responderet, Tu es Christus, non potest novum eum sensisse Christum, nisi quem noverat in scripturis, quem iam recensebat in factis. Hoc et ipse confirmat usque adhuc patiens, immo et silentium indicens. Si enim Petrus quidem non poterat alium eum confiteri quam creatoris, ille autem praecepit ne cui hoc dicerent, utique id noluit provulgari quod Petrus senserat. [7] Immo, inquis, quia non recte senserat, noluit mendacium disseminari. Sed aliam silentii causam edixit, quia oporteret filium hominis multa pati, et reprobari a presbyteris et scribis et sacerdotibus, et interfici, et post tertium diem resurgere. Quae cum praedicata sint et ipsa in Christum creatoris, sicut suis locis implebimus, sic quoque ipsum se ostendit esse in quem praedicabantur. [8] Certe et si non essent praedicata, eam causam indicti silentii protulit quae non Petri errorem demonstraret, obeundarum passionum necessitatem. Qui voluerit, inquit, animam suam salvam facere, perdet illam, et qui perdiderit eam propter me, salvam faciet eam. Certe filius hominis hanc sententiam emisit. Perspice igitur et tu cum rege Babylonio fornacem eius ardentem, et invenies illic tanquam filium hominis (nondum enim vere erat, nondum scilicet natus ex homine) iam tunc istos exitus constituentem. Salvas facit animas trium fratrum, qui eas pro deo perdere conspiraverant, Chaldaeorum vero perdidit, quas illi per idololatriam salvas facere maluerant. Quae est ista nova doctrina cuius vetera documenta sunt? [9] Quamquam et praedicationes martyriorum tam futurorum quam a deo mercedem relaturorum decucurrerunt. Vide, inquit Esaias, quomodo perit iustus, et nemo excipit corde, et viri iusti auferuntur, et nemo considerat. Quando magis hoc fit quam in persecutione sanctorum eius? Utique non simplex, nec de naturae lege communis, sed illa insignis et pro fide militaris, in qua qui animam suam propter deum perdit, servat illam, ut et hic tamen iudicem cognoscas, qui malum animae lucrum perditione eius et bonum animae detrimentum salute eius remuneratur. [10] Sed et zeloten deum mihi exhibet, malum malo reddentem: Qui confusus, inquit, mei fuerit, et ego confundar eius. Quando nec confusionis materia conveniat nisi meo Christo, cuius ordo magis pudendus, ut etiam haereticorum conviciis pateat, omnem nativitatis et educationis foeditatem et ipsius etiam carnis indignitatem quanta amaritudine possunt perorantibus. [11] Ceterum quomodo ille erit obnoxius confusionis qui eam non capit? non vulva licet virginis, tamen feminae, coagulatus, et si non semine, tamen ex lege substantiae corporalis, ex feminae humore, non caro habitus ante formam, non pecus dictus post figuram, non decem mensium cruciatu deliberatus, non subita dolorum concussione cum tanti temporis coeno per corporis cloacam effusus ad terram, nec statim lucem lacrimis auspicatus et primo retinaculi sui vulnere, nec mulso ablutus, nec sale ac melle medicatus, nec pannis iam sepulturae involucrum initiatus, nec exinde per immunditias inter sinus volutatus, molestus uberibus, diu infans, vix puer, tarde homo, sed de caelo expositus, semel grandis, semel totus, statim Christus, spiritus et virtus et deus tantum. Ceterum ut non verus, qui non videbatur, ita nec de crucis maledicto erubescendus, cuius carebat veritate, carens corpore. [12] Non poterat itaque dixisse, Qui mei confusus fuerit. Noster hoc debuit pronuntiasse, minoratus a patre modico citra angelos, vermis et non homo, ignominia hominis et nullificamen populi, quatenus ita voluit ut livore eius sanaremur, ut dedecore eius salus nostra constaret. Et merito se pro suo homine deposuit, pro imagine et similitudine sua, non aliena, ut quoniam homo non erubuerat lapidem et lignum adorans, eadem constantia non confusus de Christo, pro impudentia idololatriae satis deo faceret per impudentiam fidei. Quid horum Christo tuo competit, Marcion, ad meritum confusionis? Plane pudere te debet quod illum ipse finxisti.

He sends forth His disciples to preach the kingdom of God. Does He here say of what God? He forbids their taking anything for their journey, by way of either food or raiment. Who would have given such a commandment as this, but He who feeds the ravens and clothes the flowers of the field? Who anciently enjoined for the treading ox an unmuzzled mouth, that he might be at liberty to gather his fodder from his labour, on the principle that the worker is worthy of his hire? Marcion may expunge such precepts, but no matter, provided the sense of them survives. But when He charges them to shake off the dust of their feet against such as should refuse to receive them, He also bids that this be done as a witness. Now no one bears witness except in a case which is decided by judicial process; and whoever orders inhuman conduct to be submitted to the trial by testi

mony, does really threaten as a judge. Again, that it was no new god which recommended by Christ, was dearly attested by the opinion of all men, because some maintained to Herod that Jesus was the Christ; others, that He was John; some, that He was Elias; and others, that He was one of the old prophetss. Now, whosoever of all these He might have been, He certainly was not raised up for the purpose of announcing another god after His resurrection. He feeds the multitude in the desert place; this, you must knows was after the manner of the Old Testament. Or else, if there was not the same grandeur, it follows that He is now inferior to the Creator. For He, not for one day, but during forty years, not on the inferior aliment of bread and fish, but with the manna of heaven, supported the lives of not five thousand, but of six hundred thousand human beings. However, such was the greatness of His miracle, that He willed the slender supply of food, not only to be enough, but even to prove superabundant; and herein He followed the ancient precedent. For in like manner, during the famine in Elijah's time, the scanty and final meal of the widow of Sarepta was multiplied by the blessing of the prophet throughout the period of the famine. You have the third book of the Kings. If you also turn to the fourth book, you will discover all this conduct of Christ pursued by that man of God, who ordered ten barley loaves which had been given him to be distributed among the people; and when his servitor, after contrasting the large number of the persons with the small supply of the food, answered, "What, shall I set this before a hundred men?" he said again, "Give them, and they shall eat: for thus saith the Lord, They shall eat, and shall leave thereof, according to the word of the Lord." O Christ, even in Thy novelties Thou art old! Accordingly, when Peter, who had been an eye-witness of the miracle, and had compared it with the ancient precedents, and had discovered in them prophetic intimations of what should one day come to pass, answered (as the mouthpiece of them all) the Lord's inquiry, "Whom say ye that I am?" in the words, "Thou art the Christ," he could not but have perceived that He was that Christ, beside whom he knew of none else in the Scriptures, and whom he was now surveying in His wonderful deeds. This conclusion He even Himself confirms by thus far bearing with it, nay, even enjoining silence respecting it. For if Peter was unable to acknowledge Him to be any other than the Creator's Christ, while He commanded them "to tell no man that saying," surely He was unwilling to have the conclusion promulged which Peter had drawn. No doubt of that, you say; but as Peter's conclusion was a wrong one, therefore He was unwilling to have a lie disseminated. It was, however, a different reason which He assigned for the silence, even because "the Son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and scribes, and priests, and be slain, and be raised again the third day." Now, inasmuch as these sufferings were actually foretold for the Creator's Christ (as we shall fully show in the proper place), so by this application of them to His own case does He prove that it is He Himself of whom they were predicted. At all events, even if they had not been predicted, the reason which He alleged for imposing silence (on the disciples) was such as made it clear enough that Peter had made no mistake, that reason being the necessity of His undergoing these sufferings. "Whosoever," says He, "will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it." Surely it is the Son of man who uttered this sentence. Look carefully, then, along with the king of Babylon, into his burning fiery furnace, and there you will discover one "like the Son of man" (for He was not yet really Son of man, because not yet born of man), even as early as then appointing issues such as these. He saved the lives of the three brethren, who had agreed to lose them for God's sake; but He destroyed those of the Chaldaeans, when they had preferred to save them by the means of their idolatry. Where is that novelty, which you pretend in a doctrine which possesses these ancient proofs? But all the predictions have been fulfilled concerning martydoms which were to happen, and were to receive

the recompenses of their reward from God. "See," says Isaiah, "how the righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart; and just men are taken away, and no man considereth." When does this more frequently happen than in the persecution of His saints? This, indeed, is no ordinary matter, no common casualty of the law of nature; but it is that illustrious devotion, that fighting for the faith, wherein whosoever loses his life for God saves it, so that you may here again recognize the Judge who recompenses the evil gain of life with its destruction, and the good loss thereof with its salvation. 

It is, however, a jealous God whom He here presents to me 
[[bbl.torah#c20#5]]

one who returns evil for evil. 

"For whosoever," says He, "shall be ashamed of me, of him will I also be ashamed." 

Now to none but my Christ can be assigned the occasion of such a shame as this. His whole course was so exposed to shame as to open a way for even the taunts of heretics, declaiming with all the bitterness in their power against the utter disgrace of His birth and bringing-up, and the unworthiness of His very flesh. But how can that Christ of yours be liable to a shame, which it is impossible for him to experience? Since he was never condensed into human flesh in the womb of a woman, although a virgin; never grew from human seed, although only after the law of corporeal substance, from the fluids of a woman; was never deemed flesh before shaped in the womb; never called foetus after such shaping; was never delivered from a ten months' writhing in the womb; was never shed forth upon the ground, amidst the sudden pains of parturition, with the unclean issue which flows at such a time through the sewerage of the body, forthwith to inaugurate the light of life with tears, and with that primal wound which severs the child from her who bears him; never received the copious ablution, nor the meditation of salt and honey; nor did he initiate a shroud with swaddling clothes; nor afterwards did he ever wallow in his own uncleanness, in his mother's lap; nibbling at her breast; long an infant; gradually a boy; by slow degrees a man. But he was revealed from heaven, full-grown at once, at once complete; immediately Christ; simply spirit, and power, and god. But as withal he was not true, because not visible; therefore he was no object to be ashamed of from the curse of the cross, the real endurance of which he escaped, because wanting in bodily substance. Never, therefore, could he have said, "Whosever shall be ashamed of me." But as for our Christ, He could do no otherwise than make such a declaration; "made" by the Father "a little lower than the angels," "a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the people;" seeing that it was His will that "with His stripes we should be healed," that by His humiliation our salvation should be established. And justly did He humble Himself for His own creature man, for the image and likeness of Himself, and not of another, in order that man, since he had not felt ashamed when bowing down to a stone or a stock, might with similar courage give satisfaction to God for the shamelessness of his idolatry, by displaying an equal degree of shamelessness in his faith, in not being ashamed of Christ. Now, Marcion, which of these courses is better suited to your Christ, in respect of a meritorious shame? Plainly, you ought yourself to blush with shame for having given him a fictitious existence.
### c25
 [1] Quis dominus caeli invocabitur qui non prius factor ostenditur? Gratias enim, inquit, ago, et confiteor, domine caeli, quod ea quae erant abscondita sapientibus et prudentibus, revelaveris parvulis. Quae ista? et cuius? et a quo abscondita? et a quo revelata? Si a deo Marcionis abscondita et revelata, qui omnino nihil praemiserat in quo aliquid absconditum esse potuisset, non prophetias, non parabolas, non visiones, non ulla rerum aut verborum aut nominum argumenta per allegorias et figuras vel aenigmatum nebulas obumbrata, [2] sed ipsam magnitudinem sui absconderat, quam cum maxime per Christum revelabat, satis inique. Quid enim deliquerant sapientes et prudentes, ut absconderetur illis deus, ad quem cognoscendum non suffecerat sapientia atque prudentia illoruxn? Nulla via data ab ipso per aliquam operum praedicationem, vel vestigia per quae sapientes atque prudentes deducerentur. Quamquam et si in aliquo deliquissent erga deum ignotum, pone nunc notum, non tamen zeloten eum experiri debuissent, qui dissimilis creatoris inducitur. [3] Igitur si nec materias praemiserat in quibus aliquid occultasset, nec reos habuerat a quibus occultasset, nec debuerat occultasse etiam si habuisset, iam nec revelator ipse erit, qui absconditor non fuit, ita nec dominus caeli nec pater Christi; sed ille in quem competunt omnia. Nam et abscondit praemisso obscuritatis propheticae instrumento, cuius intellectum fides mereretur (Nisi enim credideritis, non intellegetis) et reos habuit sapientes atque prudentes ex ipsis operibus tot ac tantis intellegibilem deum non requirentes vel perperam in illum philosophantes et ingenia haereticis subministrantes, et novissime zelotes est. [4] Denique olim hoc per Esaiam contionabatur quod Christus gratulatur: Perdam sapientiam sapientium et prudentiam prudentium celabo. Sicut et alibi tam abscondisse quam revelaturum esse significat: Et dabo illis thesauros absconditos, invisibiles aperiam illis. Et rursus: Quis alius disiciet signa ventriloquorum et divinationes ex corde, avertens in posteriora sapientes et cogitationes eorum infatuans? [5] Si autem et Christum suum illuminatorem nationum designavit: Posui te in lucem nationum, quas interpretamur in nomine parvulorum, sensu scilicet retro parvas et imprudentia infantes, iam vero et humilitate fidei pusillas, facilius utique credemus eundem etiam parvulis revelasse per Christum qui et retro absconderit et per Christum revelationem repromiserit. [6] Aut si deus Marcionis ea quae a creatore abscondita retro fuerant patefecit, ergo iam creatori negotium gessit, res eius edisserens. Sed in destructionem, inquis, uti traduceret eas. Ergo illis traduxisse debuerat quibus creator abscondidit, sapientibus et prudentibus. Si enim benignitate faciebat, illis erat agnitio praestanda quibus fuerat negata, non parvulis quibus nihil creator inviderat. [7] Et tamen usque adhuc, puto, probamus exstructionem potius legis et prophetarum inveniri in Christo quam destructionem. Omnia sibi tradita dicit a patre. Credas, si creatoris est Christus, cuius omnia: quia non minori se tradidit omnia filio creator quae per eum condidit, per sermonem suum scilicet. Ceterum si e0perxo&menoj ille, quae sunt omnia quae illi a patre sunt tradita? Quae sunt creatoris? [8] Ergo bona sunt quae pater filio tradidit, et bonus iam creator cuius omnia bona sunt, et ille iam non bonus qui in aliena bona invasit, ut filio traderet. Docens alieno abstinere, certe mendicissimus qui nec filium unde ditaret habuit nisi de alieno. Aut si nihil de creatoris traditum est ei a patre, ecquomodo hominem creatoris sibi vindicat? Aut si solus homo ei traditus est, omnia homo non est. Scriptura autem omnium edicit traditionem filio factam. [9] Sed et si omnia ad hominum genera, id est ad omnes nationes, interpretaberis, et has filio tradidisse creatoris est: Dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tuam et possessionem tuam terminos terrae. Aut si habet et ipse aliqua sua quae omnia filio traderet pariter cum homine creatoris, ostende unum aliquod ex omnibus in fidem, in exemplum, ne tam merito non credam eius esse omnia cuius nihil video, quam merito credam etiam quae non video eius esse cuius sunt universa quae video. [10] Sed, Nemo scit qui sit pater, nisi filius, et qui sit filius, nisi pater, et cuicunque filius revelaverit. Atque ita Christus ignotum deum praedicavit. Hinc enim et alii haeretici fulciuntur, opponentes creatorem omnibus notum, et Israeli secundum familiaritatem et nationibus secundum naturam. Et quomodo ipse testatur nec Israeli cognitum se? Israel autem me non cognovit, et populus me non intellexit; nec nationibus? [11] Ecce enim nec de nationibus, inquit, nemo. Propter quod et illas stillicidium situlae deputavit, et Sionem tanquam speculam in vinea dereliquit. Vide ergo an confirmatio sit propheticae vocis exprobrantis ignorantiam in deum humanam, quae fuerit ad filium usque. Nam et ideo subtexuit ab eo cognosci patrem cui filius revelaverit, quoniam ipse erat qui positus a patre illuminatio nationum annuntiabatur, utique de deo illuminandarum, etiam Israelis, utique per agnitionem dei pleniorem. [12] Ita non proficient argumenta in fidem dei alterius quae creatori competere possunt, quia quae non competunt creatori, haec poterunt in fidem proficere dei alterius. Si et sequentia inspicias, Beati oculi qui vident quae videtis: dico enim vobis, quia prophetae non viderunt quae vos videtis, de superiori sensu descendunt, adeo neminem ut decuit deum cognovisse, quando nec prophetae vidissent quae sub Christo videbantur. [13] Nam si non meus esset Christus, nec prophetarum hoc in loco mentionem collocasset. Quid enim mirum si non viderant res dei ignoti et tanto post aevo revelati? Quae autem fuisset felicitas eorum qui tunc videbant quae alii merito vidisse non poterant, si non erant consecuti repraesentationem eorum quae nunquam praedicarant, nisi quoniam qui poterant vidisse aeque dei sui res, quas etiam praedicaverant, non tamen viderant? Haec autem felicitas erit aliorum qui videbant quae alii tantum praedicaverant. [14] Denique ostendemus, et iam ostendimus, ea visa in Christo quae fuerant praedicata, abscondita tamen et ab ipsis prophetis, ut absconderentur et a sapientibus et a prudentibus saeculi. In evangelio veritatis legis doctor dominum aggressus, Quid faciens, inquit, vitam aeternam consequar? In haeretico vita solummodo posita est, sine aeternae mentione, ut doctor de ea vita videatur consuluisse quae in lege promittitur a creatore longaeva, et dominus ideo illi secundum legem responsum dedisse, Diliges dominum deum tuum ex toto corde tuo et ex tota anima tua et totis viribus tuis, quoniam de lege vitae sciscitabatur. [15] Sed sciebat utique legis doctor quo pacto vitam legalem consequi posset, ut non de ea interrogasset cuius regulas etiam docebat. Sed quia et mortui iam suscitabantur a Christo, exsuscitatus ad spem aeternae vitae per exempla recidivae, ne plus aliquid observationis exigeret sublimior spes, idcirco consuluit de aeternae vitae consecutione. Itaque dominus, ut nec ipse alius, nec aliud novum inferens praeceptum quam quod principaliter ad omnem salutem et utramque vitam facit, ipsum caput ei legis opponit, omnifariam diligendi dominum deum suum. [16] Denique si de vita longaeva et ille consuluit et Christus respondit, quae sit penes creatorem, non de aeterna quae sit penes Marcionis deum, quomodo consequitur aeternam? Non utique eodem modo quo et longaevam. Pro differentia enim mercedum operarum quoque credenda distantia est. Ergo non ex dilectione dei tui consequetur vitam aeternam Marcionites, sicut longaevam dilector creatoris. [17] Sed quale est ut non magis diligendus sit qui aeternam pollicetur, si diligendus est qui longaevam repromittit? Ergo eiusdem erit utraque vita, cum eadem est utrique vitae captanda disciplina. Quod creator docet, id et Christo opus est diligi ut praestet, interveniente et hic illa praescriptione qua facilius apud eum debeant credi maiora apud quem minora praecedunt quam apud eum cui nullam de maioribus fidem aliqua minora praeparaverunt. [18] Viderit nunc si aeternam nostri addiderunt. Hoc mihi satis est, quod Christus ille aeternae, non longae, vitae invitator de longaeva consultus quam destruebat, non ad aeternam potius exhortatus est hominem quam inferebat. Quid, oro te, fecisset Christus creatoris si qui creatori diligendo aedificaverat hominem non erat creatoris? Credo, negasset diligendum creatorem.
 
Who shall be invoked as the Lord of heaven, that does not first show Himself to have been the maker thereof? For He says, "I thank thee, (O

Father,)and own Thee, Lord of heaven, because those things which had been hidden from the wise and prudent, Thou has revealed unto babes." What things are these? And whose? And by whom hidden? And by whom revealed? If it was by Marcion's god that they were hidden and revealed, it was an extremely iniquitous proceeding; for nothing at all had he ever produced in which anything could have been hidden--no prophecies, no parables, no visions, no evidences of things, or words, or names, obscured by allegories and figures, or cloudy enigmas, but he had concealed the greatness even of himself, which he was with all his might revealing by his Christ. Now in what respect had the wise and prudent done wrong, that God should be hidden from them, when their wisdom and prudence had been insufficient to come to the knowledge of Him? No way had been provided by himself, by any declaration of his works, or any vestiges whereby they might become wise and prudent.

However, if they had even failed in any duty towards a god whom they knew not, suppose him now at last to be known still they ought not to have found 

a jealous god 
[[bbl.torah#exod#c20#5]]

in him who is introduced as unlike the Creator. Therefore, since he had neither provided any materials in which he could have hidden anything, nor had any offenders from whom he could have hidden himself: since, again, even if he had had any, he ought not to have hidden himself from them, he will not now be himself the revealer, who was not previously the concealer; so neither will any be the Lord of heaven nor the Father of Christ but He in whom all these attributes consistently meet. For He conceals by His preparatory apparatus of prophetic obscurity, the understanding of which is open to faith (for "if ye will not believe, ye shall not understand"; and He had offenders in those wise and prudent ones who would not seek after God, although He was to be discovered in His so many and mighty works, or who rashly philosophized about Him, and thereby furnished to heretics their arts; and lastly, 

He is a jealous God. 
[[bbl.torah#exod#c20#5]]

Accordingly, that which Christ thanks God for doing, He long ago announced by Isaiah: 

"I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the understanding of the prudent will I hide." 

So in another passage He intimates both that He has concealed, and that He will also reveal: "I will give unto them treasures that have been hidden, and secret ones will I discover to them." And again: "Who else shall scatter the tokens of ventriloquists, and the devices of those who divine out of their own heart; turning wise men backward, and making their counsels foolish?" Now, if He has designated His Christ as an enlightener of the Gentiles, saying, "I have set thee for a light of the Gentiles;" and if we understand these to be meant in the word babes--as having been once dwarfs in knowledge and infants in prudence, and even now also babes in their lowliness of faith--we shall of course more easily understand how He who had once hidden "these things," and promised a revelation of them through Christ, was the same God as He who had now revealed them unto babes. Else, if it was Marcion's god who revealed the things which had been formerly hidden by the Creator, it follows that he did the Creator's work by setting forth His deeds. But he did it, say you, for His destruction, that he might refute them. Therefore he ought to have refuted them to those from whom the Creator had hidden them, even the wise and prudent. For if he had a kind intention in what he did, the gift of knowledge was due to those from whom the Creator had detained it, instead of the babes, to whom the Creator had grudged no gift. But after all, it is, I presume, the edifica

tion rather than the demolition of the law and the prophets which we have thus far found effected in Christ. "All things," He says, "are delivered unto me of my Father." you may believe Him, if He is the Christ of the Creator to whom all things belong; because the Creator has not delivered to a Son who is less than Himself all things, which He created by Him, that is to say, by His Word. If, on the contrary, he is the notorious stranger, what are the" all things" which have been delivered to him by the Father? Are they the Creator's? Then the things which the Father delivered to the Son are good. and the Creator is therefore good, since all His "things" are good; whereas he is no longer good who has invaded another's good (domains) to deliver it to his son, thus teaching robbery of another's goods. Surely he must be a most mendacious being, who had no other means of enriching his son than by helping himself to another's property! Or else, if nothing of the Creator's has been delivered to him by the Father, by what right does he claim for himself (authority over) man? Or again, if man has been delivered to him, and man alone, then man is not "all things." But Scripture clearly says that a transfer of all things has been made to the Son. If, however, you should interpret this "all" of the whole human race, that is, all nations, then the delivery of even these to the Son is within the purpose of the Creator: "I will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession." If, indeed, he has some things of his own, the whole of which he might give to his son, along with the man of the Creator, then show some one thing of them all, as a sample, that I may believe; lest I should have as much reason not to believe that all things belong to him, of whom I see nothing, as I have ground for believing that even the things which I see not are His, to whom belongs the universe, which I see. But "no man knoweth who the Father is, but the Son; and who the Son is, but the Father, and he to whom the Son will reveal Him." And so it was an unknown god that Christ preached! And other heretics, too, prop themselves up by this passage; alleging in opposition to it that the Creator was known to all, both to lsrael by familiar intercourse, and to the Gentiles by nature. Well, how is it He Himself testifies that He was not known to lsrael? "But Israel cloth not know me, and my people doth not consider me;" nor to the Gentiles: "For, behold," says He, "of the nations I have no man." Therefore He reckoned them "as the drop of a bucket," while "Sion He left as a look-out in a vineyard." See, then, whether there be not here a confirmation of the prophet's word, when he rebukes that ignorance of man toward God which continued to the days of the Son of man. For it was on this account that he inserted the clause that the Father is known by him to whom the Son has revealed Him, because it was even He who was announced as set by the Father to be a light to the Gentiles, who of course required to be enlightened concerning God, as well as to Israel, even by imparting to it a fuller knowledge of God. Arguments, therefore, will be of no use for belief in the rival god which may be suitable for the Creator, because it is only such as are unfit for the Creator which will be able to advance belief in His rival. If you look also into the next words, "Blessed are the eyes which see the things which ye see, for I tell you that prophets have not seen the things which ye see," you will find that they follow from the sense above, that no man indeed had come to the knowledge of God as he ought to have done, since even the prophets had not seen the things which were being seen under Christ. Now if He had not been my Christ, He would not have made any mention of the prophets in this passage. For what was there to wonder at, if they had not seen the things of a god who had been unknown to them, and was only revealed a long time after them? What blessedness, however, could theirs have been, who were then seeing what others were naturally unable to see, since it was of things which they had never predicted that they had not obtained the sight; if it were not because they might justly have seen the things pertaining to their God, which they had even predicted, but which they at the same time had not seen? This, however, will be the blessedness of others, even of such as were seeing the things which

others had only foretold. We shall by and by show, nay, we have already shown, that in Christ those things were seen which had been foretold, but yet had been hidden from the very prophets who foretold them, in order that they might be hidden also from the wise and the prudent. In the true Gospel, a certain doctor of the law comes to the Lord and asks, "What shall I do to inherit life?" In the heretical gospel life only is mentioned, without the attribute eternal; so that the lawyer seems to have consulted Christ simply about the life which the Creator in the law promises to prolong, and the Lord to have therefore answered him according to the law, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength," since the question was concerning the conditions of mere life. But the lawyer of course knew very well in what way the life which the law meant was to be obtained, so that his question could have had no relation to the life whose rules he was himself in the habit of teaching. But seeing that even the dead were now raised by Christ, and being himself excited to the hope of an eternal life by these examples of a restored one, he would lose no more time in merely looking on (at the wonderful things which had made him) so high in hope. He therefore consulted him about the attainment of eternal life. Accordingly, the Lord, being Himself the same, and introducing no new precept other than that which relates above all others to (man's) entire salvation, even including the present and the future life, places before him the very essence of the law--that he should in every possible way love the Lord his God. If, indeed, it were only about a lengthened life, such as is at the Creator's disposal, that he inquired and Christ answered, and not about the eternal life, which is at the disposal of Marcion's god, how is he to obtain the eternal one? Surely not in the same manner as the prolonged life. For in proportion to the difference of the reward must be supposed to be also the diversity of the services. Therefore your disciple, Marcion, will not obtain his eternal life in consequence of loving your God, in the same way as the man who loves the Creator will secure the lengthened life. But how happens it that, if He is to be loved who promises the prolonged I life, He is not much more to be loved who offers the eternal life? Therefore both one and the other life will be at the disposal of one and the same Lord; because one and the same discipline is to be followed for one and the other life. What the Creator teaches to be loved, that must He necessarily maintain also by Christ, for that rule holds good here, which prescribes that greater things ought to be believed of Him who has first lesser proofs to show, than of him for whom no preceding smaller presumptions have secured a claim to be believed in things of higher import. It matters not then, whether the word eternal has been interpolated by us. It is enough for me, that the Christ who invited men to the eternal--not the lengthened--life, when consuited about the temporal life which he was destroying, did not choose to exhort the man rather to that eternal life which he was introducing. Pray, what would the Creator's Christ have done. if He who had made man for loving the Creator did not belong to the Creator? I suppose He would have said that the Creator was not to be loved!
### c32
[1] Ovem et dragmam perditam quis requirit? nonne qui perdidit? Quis autem perdidit? nonne qui habuit? Quis vero habuit? nonne cuius fuit? Si igitur homo non alterius est res quam creatoris, is eum habuit cuius fuit, is perdidit qui habuit, is requisivit qui perdidit, is invenit qui quaesivit, is exultavit qui invenit. [2] Ita utriusque parabolae argumentum vacat circa eum cuius non est ovis neque dragma, id est homo. Non enim perdidit, quia non habuit; nec requisivit, quia non perdidit; nec invenit, quia nec requisivit; nec exultavit, quia non invenit. Atque adeo exultare illius est de paenitentia peccatoris, id est de perditi recuperatione, qui se professus est olira malle peccatoris paenitentiam quam mortem.

WhO sought after the lost sheep and the lost piece of silver? Was it not the loser? But who was the loser? Was it not he who once possessed them? Who, then, was that? Was it not he to whom they belonged? Since, then, man is the property of none other than the Creator, He possessed Him who owned him; He lost him who once possessed him; He sought him who lost him; He found him who sought him; He rejoiced who found him. Therefore the purport of neither parable has anything whatever to do with him to whom belongs neither the sheep nor the piece of silver, that is to say, man. For he lost him not, because he possessed him not; and he sought him not, because he lost him not; and he found him not, because he sought him not; and he rejoiced not, because he found him not. 

Therefore, to rejoice over the sinner's repentance--that is, at the recovery of lost man--is the attribute of Him who long ago professed that He would rather that the sinner should repent and not die.
[[bbl.evngl#luke#c15#7]]

### c39
[1] Olim constitit de nominum proprietate ei illam (competere) qui prior et Christum suum in homines annuntiaret et Iesum transnominaret. Constabit itaque et de impudentia eius qui multos dicat venturos in nomine ipsius, quod non sit ipsius, si non Christus et Iesus creatoris est, ad quem proprietas nominum pertinet, amplius et prohibeat eos recipi quoram et ipse par sit, ut qui proinde in nomine venit alieno: si non ipsius erat a mendacio nominis praevenire discipulos, qui per proprietatem nominis possidebat veritatem eius. [2] Venient denique illi dicentes, Ego sum Christus. Recipies eos, qui consimilem recepisti. Et hic enim in nomine suo venit. Quid nunc, quod et ipse veniet nominum dominus, Christus et Iesus creatoris? Reicies illum? Et quam iniquum, quam iniustum et optimo deo indignum, ut non recipias eum in nomine suo venientem, qui alium in nomine eius recepisti! [3] Videamus et quae signa temporibus imponat. Bella, opinor, et regnum super regnum, et gentem super gentem, et pestem, et fames terraeque motus, et formidines, et prodigia de caelo, quae omnia severo et atroci deo congruunt. Haec cum adicit etiam oportere fieri, quem se praestat? destructorem an probatorcm creatoris? Cuius dispositiones confirmat impleri oportere, quas ut optimus tam tristes quam atroces abstulisset potius quam constituisset, si non ipsius fuissent. [4] Ante haec autem persecutiones eis praedicat et passiones venturas, in martyrium utique et in salutem. Accipe praedicatum in Zacharia: Dominus, inquit, omnipotens proteget eos, et consument illos et lapidabunt lapidibus fundae et bibent sanguinem illorum velut vinum et replebunt pateras quasi altaris, et salvos eos faciet dominus illo die velut oves, populum suum, quia lapides sancti volutant. [5] Et ne putes haec in passiones praedicari, quae illos tot bellorum nomine ab allophylis manebant, respice ad species. Nemo in praedicatione bellorum legitimis armis debellandorum lapidationem enumerat popularibus coetibus magis et inermi tumultui familiarem. Nemo tanta in bello sanguinis flumina paterarum capacitate metitur, aut unius altaris cruentationi adaequat. Nemo oves appellat eos qui in bello armati et ipsi ex eadem feritate certantes cadunt, sed qui in sua proprietate atque patientia dedentes potius semetipsos quam vindicantes trucidantur. [6] Denique, Quia lapides, inquit, sancti volutant, non quia milites pugnant. Lapides enim sunt et fundamenta, super quae nos aedificamur, extructi, secundum Paulum, super fundamentum apostolorum, qui lapides sancti oppositi omnium offensui volutabant. Et hic igitur ipse vetat cogitari quid responderi oporteat apud tribunalia, qui et Balaam quod non cogitaverat, immo contra quam cogitaverat, suggessit, et Moysi causato linguae tarditatem os repromisit. Et sapientiam ipsam, cui nemo resisteret, per Esaiam demonstravit: Hic dicet, Ego dei sum, et clamabit in nomine Iacob, et alius inscribetur in nomine Israelis. [7] Quid enim sapientius et incontradicibilius confessione simplici et exserta in martyris nomine cum deo invalescentis, quod est interpretatio Israelis? Nec mirum si is cohibuit praecogitationem qui et ipse a patre excepit pronuntiandi tempestive subministrationem: Dominus mihi dat linguam disciplinae, quando debeam proferre sermonem; nisi Marcion Christum non subiectum patri infert. [8] A proximis quoque persecutiones, et nominis ex odio utique blasphemiam praedicatam, non debeo rursus ostendere. Sed per tolerantiam, inquit, salvos facietis vosmetipsos: de qua scilicet psalmus, Tolerantia, inquit, iustorum non periet in finem. Quia et alibi: Honorabilis mors iustorum; ex tolerantia sine dubio, quia et Zacharias: Corona autem erit eis qui toleraverint. [9] Sed ne audeas argumentari apostolos ut alterius dei praecones a Iudaeis vexatos, memento prophetas quoque eadem a Iudaeis passos, tamen non alterius dei apostolos fuisse quam creatoris. Sed monstrato dehinc tempore excidii, cum coepisset vallari exercitibus Hierusalem, signa iam ultimi finis enarrat, solis et lunae siderumque prodigia, et in terra angustias nationum obstupescentium velut a sonitu maris fluctuantis, pro expectatione imminentium orbi malorum. Quod et ipsae vires caelorum concuti habeant, accipe Ioelem: Et dabo prodigia in caelo, et in terra sanguinem et ignem et fumi vaporem: sol convertetur in tenebras et in sanguinem luna, priusquam adveniat dies magnus et illustris domini. Habes et Abacuc: Fluminibus disrumpetur terra, videbunt te et parturient populi: disperges aquas gressu; dedit abyssus sonum suum, sublimitas timoris eius elata est: sol et luna constitit in suo ordine, in lucem coruscationes tuae ibunt, in fulgorem fulgur scutum tuum : in comminatione tua diminues terram, et in indignatione tua depones nationes. [10] Conveniunt, opinor, et domini pronuntiationes et prophetarum de concussionibus mundi et orbis, elementorum et nationum. Post haec quid dominus? Et tunc videbunt filium hominis venientem de caelis cum plurima virtute. Cum autem haec fient, erigetis vos, et levabitis capita, quoniam appropinquavit redemptio vestra: in tempore scilicet regni, de quo subiecta erit ipsa parabola. [11] Sic et vos cum videritis omnia haec fieri, scitote appropinquasse regnum dei. Hic erit dies magnus domini et illustris, venientis de caelis filii hominis, secundum Danielem: Ecce cum caeli nubibus tanquam filius hominis adveniens, et cetera; et data est illi regia potestas, quam in parabola postulaturus exierat, relicta pecunia servis qua feneraretur: et universae nationes, quas promiserat ei in psalmo pater: Postula de me, et dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tuam: Et gloria omnis serviens illi, et potestas eius aeterna quae non auferetur, et regnum eius quod non corrumpetur, quia nec morientur in illo nec nubent, sed erunt sicut angeli. [12] De eodem adventu filii hominis et fructu eius apud Abacuc: Existi in salutem populi tui ad salvos faciendos christos tuos; erecturos scilicet se et capita levaturos, in tempore regni redemptos. Igitur cum et haec quae sunt promissionum proinde conveniant sicut et illa quae sunt concussionum, ex consonantia propheticarum et dominicarum pronuntiationum, nullam hic poteris interstruere distinctionem, ut concussiones quidem referas ad creatorem, saevitiae scilicet deum, quas nec sinere, nedum expectare deberet deus optimus, promissiones vero deo optimo deputes, quas creator ignorans illum non prophetasset. Aut si suas prophetavit, non distantes a promissionibus Christi, par erit in libertate optimo deo, nec plus videbitur a Christo tuo repromitti quam a meo filio hominis. [13] Ipsum decursum scripturae evangelicae ab interrogatione discipulorum usque ad parabolam fici ita invenies contextu sensus filio hominis hinc atque illinc adhaerere ut in illum compingat et tristia et laeta et concussiones et promissiones, nec possis separare ab illo alteram partem. [14] Unius enim filii hominis adventu constituto inter duos exitus concussionum et promissionum necesse est ad unum pertineant filium hominis et incommoda nationum et vota sanctorum, qui ita positus est in medio ut communis exitibus ambobus, alterum conclusurus adventu suo, id est incommoda nationum, alterum incipiens, id est vota sanctorum, ut, sive mei Christi concesseris adventum filii hominis, quo mala imminentia ei deputes [15] quae adventum eius antecedunt, cogaris etiam bona ei adscribere quae ab adventu eius oriuntur, sive tui malueris, quo bona ei adscribas quae ab adventu eius oriuntur, cogaris mala quoque ei deputare quae adventum eius antecedunt. Tam enim mala cohaerent adventui filii hominis antecedendo quam et bona subsequendo. Quaere igitur quem ex duobus Christis constituas in persona unius filii hominis in quam utraque dispositio referatur. Aut et creatorem optimum aut et deum tuum asperum dedisti natura. [16] In summa ipsius parabolae considera exempluna. Aspice ficum et arbores omnes: cum fructum protulerint, intellegunt homines aestatem appropinquasse; sic et vos cum videritis haec fieri, scitote in proximo esse regnum dei. Si enim fructificationes arbuscularum signum aestivo tempori praestant, antecedendo illud, proinde conflictationes orbis signum praenotant regni, praecedendo illud. Omne autem signum eius est <cuius et> res cuius est signum, et omni rei ab eo imponitur signum cuius est res. [17] Ita si conflictationes signa sunt regni, sicut fructificationes aestatis, ergo et regnum creatoris est, cuius conflictationes deputantur quae signa sunt regni. Praemiserat oportere haec fieri tam atrocia, tam dira, deus optimus, certe a prophetis et a lege praedicata; adeo legem et prophetas non destruebat, cum quae praedicaverant confirmat perfici oportere. [18] Adhuc ingerit non transiturum caelum ac terram, nisi omnia peragantur. Quaenam ista? Si quae a creatore sunt, merito sustinebunt elementa domini sui ordinem expungi; si quae a deo optimo, nescio an sustineat caelum et terra perfici quae aemulus statuit. Hoc si patietur creator, zelotes deus non est. Transeat age nunc terra et caelum; sic enim dominus eorum destinavit: dum verbum eius maneat in aevum; sic enim et Esaias praenuntiavit. Admoneantur et discipuli, ne quando graventur corda eorum crapula et ebrietate et saecularibus curis, et insistat eis repentinus dies ille velut laqueus, utique oblitis deum ex plenitudine et cogitatione mundi. Moysi erit admonitio. Adeo is liberabit a laqueo diei illius qui hanc admonitionem retro intulit. [19] Erant et loca alia apud Hierusalem ad docendum, erant et extra Hierusalem ad secedendum. Sed enim per diem in templo docebat, ut qui per Osee praedixerat: In templo meo me invenerunt, et illic disputatum est ad eos. Ad noctem vero in elaeonem secedebat. Sic enim Zacharias demonstrarat: Et stabunt pedes eius in monte elaeone. Erant horae quoque auditorio competentes. Diluculo conveniendum erat, quia per Esaiam cum dixisset, Dominus dat mihi linguam disciplinae, adiecit, Apposuit mihi mane aurem ad audiendum. Si hoc est prophetias dissolvere, quid erit adimplere?

As touching the propriety of His names, it has already been seen that both of them" are suitable to Him who was the first both to announce His Christ to mankind, and to give Him the further name of Jesus. The impudence, therefore, of Marcion's Christ will be evident, when he says that many will come in his name, whereas this name does not at all belong to him, since he is not the Christ and Jesus of the Creator, to whom these names do properly appertain; and more especially when he prohibits those to be received whose very equal in imposture he is, inasmuch as he (equally with them ) comes in a name which belongs to another--unless it was his business to warn off from a mendaciously assumed name the disciples (of One) who, by reason of His name being properly given to Him, possessed also the verity thereof. But when "they shall by and by come and say, I am Christ," they will be received by you, who have already received one altogether like them. Christ, however, comes in His own

name. What will you do, then, when He Himself comes who is the very Proprietor of these names, the Creator's Christ and Jesus? Will you reject Him? But how iniquitous, how unjust and disrespectful to the good God, that you should not receive Him who comes in His own name, when you have received another in His name! Now, let us see what are the signs which He ascribes to the times. "Wars," I observe, "and kingdom against kingdom, and nation against nation, and pestilence, and famines, and earthquakes, and fearful sights, and great signs from heaven"--all which things are suitable for a severe and terrible God. Now, when He goes on to say that "all these things must needs come to pass," what does He represent Himself to be? The Destroyer, or the Defender of the Creator? For He affirms thai these appointments of His must fully come to pass; but surely as the good God, He would have frustrated rather than advanced events so sad and terrible, if they had not been His own (decrees). "But before all these," He foretells that persecutions and sufferings were to come upon them, which indeed were "to turn for a testimony to them," and for their salvation. Hear what is predicted in Zechariah: "The Lord of hosts shall protect them; and they shall devour them, and subdue them with sling-stones; and they shall drink their blood like wine, and they shall fill the bowls as it were of the altar. And the Lord shall save them in that day, even His people, like sheep; because as sacred stones they roll," etc. And that you may not suppose that these predictions refer to such sufferings as await them from so many wars with strangers, consider the nature (of the sufferings). In a prophecy of wars which were to be waged with legitimate arms, no one would think of enumerating stones as weapons, which are better known in popular crowds and unarmed tumults. Nobody measures the copious streams of blood which flow in war by bowlfuls, nor limits it to what is shed upon a single altar. No one gives the name of sheep to those who fall in battle with arms in hand, and while repelling force with force, but only to those who are slain, yielding themselves up in their own place of duty and with patience, rather than fighting in self-defence. In short, as he says, "they roll as sacred stones," and not like soldiers fight. Stones are they, even foundation stones, upon which we are ourselves edified--"built," as St.Paul says, "upon the foundation of the apostles," who, like "consecrated stones," were rolled up and down exposed to the attack of all men. And therefore in this passage He forbids men "to meditate before what they answer" when brought before tribunals, even as once He suggested to Balaam the message which he had not thought of, nay, contrary to what he had thought; and promised "a mouth" to Moses, when he pleaded in excuse the slowness of his speech, and that wisdom which, by Isaiah, He showed to be irresistible: "One shall say, I am the Lord's, and shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe himself by the name of lsrael." Now, what plea is wiser and more irresistible than the simple and open" confession made in a martyr's cause, who "prevails with God"--which is what "Israel"

means? Now, one cannot wonder that He forbade "premeditation," who actually Himself received from the Father the ability of uttering words in season: "The Lord hath given to me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season (to him that is weary);" except that Marcion introduces to us a Christ who is not subject to the Father. That persecutions from one's nearest friends are predicted, and calumny out of hatred to His name, I need not again refer to. But "by patience," says He, "ye shall yourselves be saved." Of this very patience the Psalm says, "The patient endurance of the just shall not perish for ever;" because it is said in another Psalm, "Precious (in the sight of the Lord) is the death of the just"--arising, no doubt, out of their patient endurance, so that Zechariah declares: "A crown shall be to them that endure." But that you may not boldly contend that it was as announcers of another god that the apostles were persecuted by the Jews, remember that even the prophets suffered the same treatment of the Jews, and that they were not the heralds of any other god than the Creator. Then, having shown what was to be the period of the destruction, even "when Jerusalem should

begin to be compassed with armies," He described the signs of the end of all things: "portents in the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and upon the earth distress of nations in perplexity--like the sea roaring--by reason of their expectation of the evils which are coming on the earth." That "the very powers also of heaven have to be shaken," you may find in Joel: "And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth--blood and fire, and pillars of smoke; the sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come." In Habakkuk also you have this statement: "With rivers shall the earth be cleaved; the nations shall see thee, and be m pangs. Thou shalt disperse the waters with thy step; the deep uttered its voice; the height of its fear was raised; the sun and the moon stood still in their course; into light shall thy coruscations go; and thy shield shall be (like) the glittering of the lightning's flash; in thine anger thou shalt grind the earth, and shalt thresh the nations in thy wrath." There is thus an agreement, I apprehend, between the sayings of the Lord and of the prophets touching the shaking of the earth, and the elements, and the nations thereof. But what does the Lord say afterwards? "And then shall they see the Son of man coming from the heavens with very great power. And when these things shall come to pass, ye shall look up, and raise your heads; for your redemption hath come near," that is, at the time of the kingdom, of which the parable itself treats. "So likewise ye, when ye shall see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand." This will be the great day of the Lord, and of the glorious coming of the Son of man from heaven, of which Daniel wrote: "Behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven," etc. "And there was given unto Him the kingly power," which (in the parable) "He went away into a far country to receive for Himself," leaving money to His servants wherewithal to trade and get increase--even (that universal kingdom of) all nations, which in the Psalm the Father had promised to give to Him: Ask of me, and I 

will give Thee the heathen for Thine inheritance." "And all that glory shall serve Him; His dominion shall be an everlasting one, which shall not be taker from Him, and His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed," because in it "men shall not die, neither shall they marry, but be like the angels." It is about the same advent of the Son of man and the benefits thereof that we read in Habakkuk: "Thou wentest forth for the salvation of Thy people, even to save Thine anointed ones,--in other words, those who shall look up and lift their heads, being redeemed in the time of His kingdom. Since, therefore, these descriptions of the promises, on the one hand, agree together, as do also those of the great catastrophes, on the other--both in the predictions of the prophets and the declarations of the Lord, it will be impossible for you to interpose any distinction between them, as if the catastrophes could be referred to the Creator, as the terrible God, being such as the good god (of Marcion) ought not to permit, much less expect --whilst the promises should be ascribed to the good god, being such as the Creator, in His ignorance of the said god, could not have predicted. If, however, He did predict these promises as His own, since they differ in no respect from the promises of Christ, He will be a match in the freeness of His gifts with the good god himself; and evidently no more will have been promised by your Christ than by my Son of man. (If you examine) the whole passage of this Gospel Scripture, from the inquiry of the disciples down to the parable of the fig-tree you will find the sense in its connection suit in every point the Son of man, so that it consistently ascribes to Him both the sorrows and the joys, and the catastrophes and the promises; nor can you separate them from Him in either respect. For asmuch, then, as there is but one Son of man whose advent is placed between the two issues of catastrophe and promise, it must needs follow that to that one Son of man belong both the judgments upon the nations, and the prayers of the saints. He who thus comes in midway so as to be common to both issues, will terminate one of them by inflicting judgment on the nations at His coming; and will at the same time commence the other by fulfilling the prayers of His saints: so that if (on the one hand) you grant that the coming of the Son of man is (the advent) of my Christ, then, when you ascribe to Him the infliction of the judgments which precede His appearance, you are compelled also to assign to

Him the blessings which issue from the same. If (on the other hand) you will have it that it is the coming of your Christ, then, when you ascribe to him the blessings which are to be the result of his advent, you are obliged to impute to him likewise the infliction of the evils which precede his appearance. For the evils which precede, and the blessings which immediately follow, the coming of the Son of man, are both alike indissolubly connected with that event. Consider, therefore, which of the two Christs you choose to place in the person of the Son of man, to whom you may refer the execution of the two dispensations. You make either the Creator a most beneficent God, or else your own god terrible in his nature! Reflect, in short, on the picture presented in the parable: "Behold the fig-tree, and all the trees; when they produce their fruit, men know that summer is at hand. So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is very near." Now, if the fructification of the common trees be an antecedent sign of the approach of summer, so in like manner do the great conflicts of the world indicate the arrival of that kingdom which they precede. But every sign is His, to whom belong the thing of which it is the sign; and to everything is appointed its sign by Him to whom the thing belongs. If, therefore, these tribulations are the signs of the kingdom, just as the maturity of the trees is of the summer, it follows that the kingdom is the Creator's to whom are ascribed the tribulations which are the signs of the kingdom. Since the beneficent Deity had premised that these things must needs come to pass, although so terrible and dreadful, as they had been predicted by the law and the prophets, therefore He did not destroy the law and the prophets, when He affirmed that what had been foretold therein must be certainly fulfilled. He further declares, "that heaven and earth shall not pass away till all things be fulfilled." What things, pray, are these? Are they the things which the Creator made? Then the elements will tractably endure the accomplishment of their Maker's dispensation. If, however, they emanate from your excellent god, I much doubt whether the heaven and earth will peaceabIy allow the completion of things which their Creator's enemy has determined! If the Creator quietly submits to this, then 

He is no "jealous God." 
[[bbl.torah#exod#c20#5]]

But let heaven and earth pass away, since their Lord has so determined; only let His word remain for evermore! And so Isaiah predicted that it should. Let the disciples also be warned, "lest their hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this world; and so that day come upon them unawares, like a snare "--if indeed they should forget God amidst the abundance and occupation of the world. Like this will be found the admonition of Moses,--so that He who delivers from "the snare" of that day is none other than He who so long before addressed to men the same admonition? Some places there were in Jerusalem where to teach; other places outside Jerusalem whither to retire--"in the day-time He was teaching in the temple;" just as He had foretold by Hosea: "In my house did they find me, and there did I speak with them." "But at night He went out to the Mount of Olives." For thus had Zechariah pointed out: "And His feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of Olives." Fit hours for an audience there also were. "Early in the morning" must they resort to Him, who (having said by Isaiah, "The Lord giveth me the tongue of the learned") added, "He hath appointed me the morning, and hath also given me an ear to hear." Now if this is to destroy the prophets, what will it be to fulfil them?